A common feature of the growth processes presented is that
they are density dependent, in the sense that the growth
rate depends on the amount of resource available. This fact
creates a challenging management problem when the aim
of the intervention is to optimally use the resource, for instance by harvesting a fish population or by requiring some
effort from a crowdsourcing community, especially when
economic aspects are factored in. We face a similar challenge in vaccine distribution problems, where the growth
rate of infections is again density dependent and the objective is to reduce its spreading.
This study, in particular, has been motivated by the alarming consideration that many natural resources are endangered due to over-exploitation and generally poorly managed. For instance, the Food and Agricultural Organization
estimates in their most recent report that 7% of marine fish
stocks are already depleted, 1% are recovering from depletion, 52% are fully exploited and 17% are overexploited
([1]).
One of the most fundamental aspects of the problem seems
to be the lack of an effective way to handle the uncertainty
affecting the complex dynamics involved. While in most of
the works in the literature [6, 7] these growth processes are
modeled with deterministic first-order difference or differential equations, this approach often represents an oversimplification. In fact their intrinsic growth is often affected
by many variables and unpredictable factors. For example,
in the case of animal populations such as fisheries, both
weather and climate conditions are known to affect both
the growth and the mortality in the population. Other variable ecological factors such as the availability of food or
the interaction with other species also influence their natural dynamics to the point that it is very difficult even to
obtain reliable mathematical models to describe their dynamics.
On the other hand, stochastic differential equations can easily incorporate these variable factors and therefore represent a more robust description. However, obtaining a prob-

abilistic description of such systems is far from easy. In
fact, even if in principle uncertainty could be reduced by
collecting and analyzing more data, it is generally believed
that complex and stochastic systems, such a marine environments, could never become predictable (to the point
that the authors of [13] believe that “predictability of anything as complex as marine ecosystem will forever remain
a chimera”).
Moreover, there are situations of “radical uncertainty” ([8])
or ambiguity where a stochastic description is not feasible
because the probabilities are not quantifiable. For instance,
many fundamental environmental issues that we are facing, such as those surrounding the climate change debate,
involve ambiguity in the sense of scientific controversies or
irreducible beliefs that cannot be resolved.
In the context of stochastic optimization, there are two
main ways to deal with uncertainty. The first one involves
a risk management approach, where it is assumed that the
probabilities of the stochastic events are known a priori or
are learned from experience through statistical data analysis. Within this framework, decisions are taken according
to stochastic control methods. Using tools such as risksensitive Markov decision processes ([12, 15]), it is also
possible to encode into the problem the attitude towards
risk of the decision maker by using an appropriate utility
function. In particular the degree of risk aversion can be
controlled by sufficiently penalizing undesirable outcomes
with the utility function. When a fine grained stochastic description is not available, worst-case game theoretic frameworks, that are inherently risk averse, play a fundamental role because it is often crucial to devise policies that
avoid catastrophic depletion. This type of approach, where
the problem of data uncertainty is addressed by guaranteeing the optimality of the solution for the worst realizations
of the parameters, is also known in the literature as robust
optimization ([3, 5]), and has been successfully applied to
uncertain linear, conic quadratic and semidefinite programming.
In this paper, we present a class of Markov decision processes that arise as a natural model for many resource management problems. Instead of formulating the optimization problem in a traditional form as a maximization of an
expected utility, we tackle the management problems in a
game theoretic framework, where the optimization problem
is equivalent to a dynamic game against nature. This formulation is a particular type of Markov game [14] (sometimes called a stochastic game [16]) where there are only
two agents (the manager and nature) and they have diametrically opposed goals.
As mentioned before, although this formulation is more
conservative, it also eliminates the very difficult task of estimating the probabilities of the stochastic events affecting
the system. In a context where the emphasis in the literature has traditionally been on the study of expected utilities,

this approach represents a new perspective. Moreover, the
policies thus obtained provide a lower bound on the utility
that can be guaranteed to be achieved, no matter the outcomes of the stochastic events. For this class of problems,
we are able to completely characterize the optimal policy
with a theoretical analysis that extends results from the inventory control literature, obtaining a closed form solution
for the optimal policy.
As part of the new exciting research area of Computational
Sustainability ([10]), where techniques from computer science and related fields are applied to solve the pressing sustainability challenges of our time, we present an application
of the proposed framework to the Northern Pacific Halibut
fishery, one of the largest and most lucrative fisheries of the
Northwestern coast. In particular, our method suggests the
use of a cyclic scheme that involves periodic closures of the
fishery, a policy that is structurally different from the one
usually employed, that instead tries to maintain the stock
at a given size with appropriate yearly harvests. However,
this framework is interesting in its own right and, as briefly
mentioned before, it applies to a variety of other problems
that share a similar mathematical structure and that arise
in very different domains. For example, we can apply our
framework to pollution problems, where a stock of pollutants is evolving over time due to human action, and the
objective is to minimize the total costs deriving from the
presence of a certain stock of pollutants and the costs incurred with cleanups, but also to crowdsourcing and other
problems.

2

MDP Formulation

In this section, we will formulate the optimization problem
as discrete time, continuous space Markov decision process. Whenever possible, we will use a notation consistent
with the one used in [4]. Even if we will consider only a
finite horizon problem, the results can be extended to the
infinite horizon case with limiting arguments. To make the
description concrete, the model will be mostly described
having a natural resource management problem in mind.
We consider a dynamical system evolving over time according to
xn+1 = f (xn − hn , wn ),
(1)
where xn ∈ R denotes the stock of a renewable resource
at time n. By using a discrete time model we implicitly assume that replacement or birth processes occur in regular,
well defined “breeding seasons”, where f (·) is a reproduction function that maps the stock level at the end of one
season to the new stock level level at the beginning of the
next season. The control or decision variable at year n is
the harvest level hn (occurring between two consecutive
breeding seasons), that must satisfy 0 ≤ hn ≤ xn .
As mentioned in the introduction, the function f (·) cap-

tures the intrinsic replenishment ability of renewable resources, that in many practical applications (such as fisheries or forestry) is density dependent: growth rate is high
when the habitat is underutilized but it decreases when
the stock is larger and intraspecific competition intensifies.
Specific properties of reproduction functions f (·) will be
discussed in detail later, but we will always assume that
there is a finite maximum stock level denoted by m.
To compensate for the higher level description of the complex biological process we are modeling, we introduce uncertainty into the model through wn , a random variable that
might capture, for example, the temperature of the water,
an uncontrollable factor that influences the growth of the
resource. Given the worst case framework we are considering, we will never make assumptions on the probability distribution of wn but only on its support (or, in other words,
on the possible outcomes). In fact in an adversarial setting
it is sufficient to consider all possible scenarios, each one
corresponding to an action that nature can take against the
policy maker, without assigning them a weight in a probabilistic sense.
Given the presence of stochasticity, it is convenient to consider closed loop optimization approaches, where decisions
are made in stages and the manager is allowed to gather information about the system between stages. In particular,
we assume that the state of the system xn ∈ R is completely observable. For example, in the context of fisheries
this means that we assume to know exactly the level of the
stock xn when the harvest level hn is to be chosen. In
this context, a policy is a sequence of rules used to select
at each period a harvest level for each possible stock size.
In particular, an admissible policy π = {µ1 , . . . , µN } is a
sequence of functions, each one mapping stocks sizes x to
harvests h, so that for all x and for all i
0 ≤ µi (x) ≤ x.

(2)

We assume that the marginal harvesting cost g(x) increases
as the stock size x decreases. We include time preference
into the model by considering a fixed discount factor α =
1/(1 + δ) ( 0 ≤ α ≤ 1), where δ > 0 is a discount rate.
For any given horizon length N , we consider the problem
of finding an admissible policy π = {µi }i∈[1,N ] that maximizes
π
(x) =
CN

min
w1 , . . . , wN
wi ∈ W (xi )

N
X

αn (R(xn ) − R(xn − hn ) − Kδ0 (hn ))

n=1

where xn is subject to (1) and hn = µn (xn ), with initial
condition x1 = x and

1 if x > 0,
δ0 (x) =
0 otherwise.
This is a Max-Min formulation of the optimization problem, where the goal is to optimize the utility in a worst-case
scenario. As opposed to the maximization of an expected
utility ([17, 18]), this formulation is inherently risk averse.
An advantage of this formulation is that there is no need to
characterize the probability distribution of the random variables wk explicitly, but only to determine their support. In
fact, one should consider all the possible scenarios, without
worrying about the probabilities of their occurrence.

3

Main Results

3.1

Minimax Dynamic Programming

π
A policy π is called an optimal N -period policy if CN
(x)
attains its supremum over all admissible policies at π for
all x. We call
π
CN (x) = sup CN
(x),

2.1

π∈Π

Resource Economics

We now consider the economic aspects of the model. We
suppose that the revenue obtained from a harvest h is proportional to h through a fixed price p, and that harvesting
is costly. In particular we assume that there is

the optimal value function, where Π represents the set of
all admissible policies.
As a consequence of the principle of optimality([4]), the
dynamic programming equation for this problem reads:
C0 (x)
Cn (x)

• a fixed set-up cost K each time a harvest is undertaken
• a marginal harvest cost g(x) per unit harvested when
the stock size is x
It follows that the utility derived from a harvest h from an
initial stock x is
Z x
g(y)dy − K , R(x) − R(x − h) − K, (3)
ph −

R(x) = px −

Z

x

g(y)dy.
0

0,
max

min R(xn ) − R(xn − hn )

0≤hn ≤x wn ∈W

−Kδ0 (hn ) + αCn−1 (f (x − hn , wn ))
for all n > 0. The latter equation can be rewritten in terms
of the remaining stock z = x − hn (the post decision state)
as

x−h

where

=
=



Cn (x) = α max
0≤z≤x

R(x) − R(z) − Kδ0 (x − z) + min Cn−1 (f (z, wn )) .
wn ∈W

(4)

This formulation of the problem is effectively analogous
to a game against nature in the context of a two-person
zero-sum game. The objective is in fact devising the value
of z that maximizes the utility, but assuming that nature
is actively playing against the manager with the opposite
intention.
It can be shown (see [4]) that Cn (x), the revenue function
associated with an optimal policy, is the (unique) solution
to equation (4). From equation (4) we see that an optimal
policy, when there are n periods left and the stock level is
x, undertakes a harvest if and only if there exists 0 ≤ z ≤ x
such that

• If β(·) is nondecreasing and concave on I
and ψ(·) is nondecreasing and K-concave on
[inf x∈I β(x), supx∈I β(x)] then the composition
ψ ◦ β is K-concave on I.
• Let β1 (x), . . . , βN (x) be a family of functions such
that βi (x) is Ki -concave. Then γ(x) = mini βi (x) is
(maxi Ki )-concave.
• If β(·) is a continuous, K-concave function on the interval [0, m], then there exists scalars 0 ≤ S ≤ s ≤ m
such that
– β(S) ≥ β(q) for all q ∈ [0, m].
– Either s = m and β(S) − K ≤ β(m) or s < m
and β(S) − K = β(s) ≥ β(q) for all q ∈ [s, m).
– β(·) is a decreasing function on [s, m].
– For all x ≤ y ≤ s, β(x) − K ≤ β(y).

R(x) − R(z) − K + α min Cn−1 (f (z, wn )) >
wn ∈W

α min Cn−1 (f (x, wn )).
wn ∈W

In fact, an action should be taken if and only if its associated benefits are sufficient to compensate the fixed cost
incurred. By defining
(5)

The proof is not reported here for space reasons, but can
be found in [9]. Similar results for K-convex functions are
proved in [4].

we have that an optimal policy, when there are n periods
left and the stock level is x, undertakes a harvest if and
only if there exists 0 ≤ z ≤ x such that

In the following section we will prove by induction the Kconcavity of the functions Pn (x), n = 1, . . . , N . This will
allow us to characterize the structure of the optimal policy
by using the last assertion of Lemma 1.

Pn (x) = −R(x) + α min Cn−1 (f (x, wn )),
wn ∈W

Pn (z) − K > Pn (x).

(6)

To examine this kind of relationship it is useful to introduce
the notion of K-concavity, a natural extension of the Kconvexity property originally introduced by Scarf in [19]
to study inventory control problems.
3.2

Preliminaries on K-concavity

A function β(·) is K-concave if given three points x < y <
z, β(y) exceeds the secant approximation to β(y) obtained
using the points β(x) − K and β(z). Therefore for K = 0
no slack is allowed and one recovers the standard definition
of concavity. Formally
Definition 1. A real valued function β(·) is K-concave if
for all x, y, x < y, and for all b > 0
β(x) − β(y) − (x − y)

β(y + b) − β(y)
≤ K.
b

(7)

We state some useful results concerning K-concavity:
Lemma 1. The following properties hold:
• A concave function is 0-concave and hence Kconcave for all K ≥ 0 .
• If β1 (q) and β2 (q) are respectively K1 -concave and
K2 -concave for constants K1 ≥ 0 and K2 ≥ 0,
then aβ1 (q) + bβ2 (q) is (aK1 + bK2 )-concave for any
scalars a > 0 and b > 0.

3.3

On the Optimality of (S − s) policies

Suppose that we can prove that Pn (x) is continuous and
strictly K-concave. Then by Lemma 1 there exists Sn , sn
with the properties proved in the last point of the Lemma.
It is easy to see that condition (6) is satisfied only if x > s,
in which case the optimal value of the remaining stock
z would be precisely Sn . In conclusion, if we can prove
the continuity and K-concavity of the functions Pn (x),
n = 1, . . . , N , then following feedback control law, known
as a nonstationary (S − s) policy, is optimal:
At period n, a harvest is undertaken if and only if the
current stock level is greater than sn ; in that case the stock
is harvested down to Sn .
This policy is known in the inventory control literature as a
nonstationary (S −s) policy 1 , because the levels Sn and sn
are time dependent. Since it is assumed that the marginal
harvest cost g(x) is a non increasing function, we define x0
to be the zero profit level such that g(x0 ) = p. If g(x) < p
for all x, we define x0 = 0. As a consequence for all
x > x0 we have that R′ (x) ≥ 0 so that R (defined in
equation (3)) is non decreasing. Moreover if the marginal
harvest cost g(x) is a non increasing function, then R is
convex.
1
For the sake of consistency, we call sn the threshold value
that governs the decision, even if in our case Sn ≤ sn .

We also need to make an assumption on the concavity of
R(·). In particular the marginal cost function g is allowed
to decrease but not by too much. Let m Rbe an upper bound
x
on the possible values of x and G(x) = 0 g(t)dt, then we
need


1−α
,
(8)
τ = G(m) − mg(m) < K
α

nondecreasing, consider the case 0 ≤ x1 < x2 ≤ sn+1 :

α

Cn+1 (x2 ) − Cn+1 (x1 ) =

min Cn (f (x2 , wn )) − min Cn (f (x1 , wn )) .

wn ∈W

min

wn ∈W (x2 )

The main result is the following theorem, where we show
that if some assumptions are satisfied, the optimal policy is
of (S − s) type. The key point of this inductive proof is
to show that the K-concavity property is preserved by the
Dynamic Programming operator.
Theorem 1. For any setup cost K > 0 and any positive
integer N , if f (·, w) is nondecreasing and concave for any
w and if g is non increasing and satisfies condition (8),
then the functions Pn (x) defined as in (5) are continuous
and K-concave for all n = 1, . . . , N . Hence there exists a
non-stationary (S − s) policy that is optimal. The resulting optimal present value functions Cn (x) are continuous,
nondecreasing and K-concave for all n = 1, . . . , N .
Proof. From equation (8) we know that there exists a number k such that
(9)

The proof is by induction on N . The base case N = 0
is trivial because C0 (x) = 0 for all x, and therefore it
is continuous, nondecreasing and k-concave. Now we
assume that Cn (x) is continuous, nondecreasing and kconcave, and we show that Pn+1 (x) is continuous and Kconcave, and that Cn+1 (x) is continuous, nondecreasing
and k-concave.
Since f (·, w) is nondecreasing and concave for all w,
Cn (f (z, wn )) is K-concave by Lemma (1). By Lemma
1

wn ∈W

If for all x2 > x1 ≥ 0,

a condition that implies the τ -concavity of R.

(K + τ )α < k < K.



f (x2 , wn ) ≥

min

wn ∈W (x1 )

f (x1 , wn ),

then Cn+1 (x2 ) − Cn+1 (x1 ) ≥ 0 because Cn (x) is nondecreasing. For the case sn+1 < x1 < x2 and sn+1 ≥ x0 :
Cn+1 (x2 ) − Cn+1 (x1 ) = α(R(x2 ) − R(x1 )) ≥ 0,
because R is nondecreasing on that interval. It must be the
case that Sn+1 > x0 because harvesting below x0 is not
profitable and reduces the marginal growth of the stock, so
given that sn+1 ≥ Sn+1 ≥ x0 we conclude that Cn+1 (x)
is nondecreasing. It remains to show that Cn+1 (x) is kconcave, and by equation (9) it is sufficient to show that it
is (K + τ )α-concave. To show that definition (7) holds for
Cn+1 (x), we consider several cases.
When x < y ≤ sn+1 , according to equation (10) we have
that Cn+1 (x) = α(Pn+1 (x) + R(x)) and therefore equation (7) holds by Lemma 1 because Pn+1 is K-concave and
R(·) is τ -concave. Similarly when sn+1 < x < y, equation (7) holds because R(·) is τ -concave.
When x ≤ sn+1 < y equation (7) reads
Cn+1 (y + b) − Cn+1 (y)
≤
Cn+1 (x) − Cn+1 (y) − (x − y)
b


R(y + b) − R(y)
≤
α K + R(x) − R(y) − (x − y)
b
α(K + τ ).
because Pn+1 (x) ≤ Pn+1 (Sn+1 ) and R(·) is τ -concave.

4

Consistency and Complexity

min Cn−1 (f (z, wn ))

wn ∈W

Even if Theorem 1 completely describes the structure of the
optimal policy, in general there is no closed form solution
for the values of Sn and sn , that need to be computed numerically. In order to use the standard dynamic programming approach, the state, control and disturbance spaces
must be discretized, for instance using an evenly spaced
grid. Since we are assuming that those spaces are bounded,
we obtain in this way discretized sets with a finite number
of elements. We can then write DP like equations for those

α(Pn+1 (x) + R(x))
if x ≤ sn+1 , points, using an interpolation of the value function for the
Cn+1 (x) =
α(Pn+1 (Sn+1 ) + R(x) − K) if x > sn+1 . points that are not on the grid. The equations can be then
solved recursively, obtaining the semi-optimal action to be
(10)
taken for each point of the grid, that can then be extended
The continuity of Cn+1 (x) descends from the continuby interpolation to obtain an approximate solution to the
ity of Pn+1 (x) and because by definition Pn+1 (sn+1 ) +
original problem.
R(sn+1 ) = Pn+1 (Sn+1 ) + R(sn+1 ) − K. To show it is

is also K-concave. Again using Lemma 1, if −R(x)
is concave, then by equation (5) Pn+1 (x) is K-concave.
The continuity of Pn+1 (x) is implied by the continuity of
Cn (x) and R(x).
Given that Pn+1 (x) is K-concave and continuous, the optimal action is to harvest down to Sn+1 if and only if the
current stock level is greater than sn+1 , so we have

The standard dynamic programming algorithm involves
O(|X||W ||U ||T |) arithmetic operations, where |X| is the
number of discretized states, |W | the number of possible
outcomes of the (discretized) uncontrollable events, |U | the
maximum number of possible discretized actions that can
be taken in any given state and T is the length of the time
horizon. However, the priori knowledge of the structure of
the optimal policy can be used to speed up the computation. In fact it is sufficient to find s (for example by bisection) and compute the optimal control associated with any
state larger than s to completely characterize the policy for
a given time step. The complexity of this latter algorithm
is O(|W ||U ||T | log |X|).

5

Case Study: the Pacific Halibut

As part of the ongoing effort in the emerging field of Computational Sustainability, we consider an application of our
framework to the Pacific Halibut fishery.
The commercial exploitation of the Pacific halibut on the
Northwestern coastline of North America dates back to the
late 1800s, and it is today one of the region’s largest and
most profitable fisheries.The fishery developed so quickly
that by the early 20th century it was starting to exhibit
signs of overfishing. After the publication of scientific reports which demonstrated conclusively a sharp decline of
the stocks, governments of the U.S. and Canada signed a
treaty creating the International Pacific Halibut Commission (IPHC) to rationally manage the resource. The IPHC
commission controls the amount of fish caught annually by
deciding each year’s total allowable catch (TAC), that is
precisely the decision variable hn of our optimization problem.
5.1

Management Problem Formulation

To develop a bioeconomic model of the fishery, we have
extracted data 2 from the IPHC annual reports on estimated
biomass xt , harvest ht and effort Et (measured in thousands of skate soaks) for Area 3A (one of the major regulatory areas in which waters are divided) for a 33 years period
from 1975 to 2007. To model the population dynamics, we
2

Data is available from the authors upon request.

200
Effort H1000 sk. soaksL , Stock H10^6 poundsL

As with all discretization schemes, we need to discuss the
consistency of the method. In particular, we would like
(uniform) convergence to the solution of the original problem in the limit as the discretization becomes finer. It is
well known that in general this property does not hold.
However in this case Theorem 1 guarantees the continuity
of Cn , that in turn implies the consistency of the method,
even if the policy itself is not continuous as a function of
the state([4]). Intuitively, discrepancies are possible only
around the threshold sn , so that they tend to disappear as
the discretization becomes finer.

hist. stock
150

est. stock
hist. effort
est. effort

100

50

0
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Year

Figure 1: Fitted models (11) and (13) compared to historical data (in bold).
consider the Beverton-Holt model that uses the following
reproduction function
xn+1 = f (sn ) = (1 − m)sn +

r0 sn
,
1 + sn /M

(11)

where sn = xn −hn is the stock remaining after fishing (escapement) in year n. This model can be considered as a discretization of the continuous-time logistic equation. Here,
parameter m represents a natural mortality coefficient, r0
can be interpreted as a reproduction rate and M (r0 −m)/m
is the carrying capacity of the environment. The (a priori)
mortality coefficient we use is m = 0.15, that is the current
working value used by the IPHC. The values of r0 and M
are estimated by ordinary least square fitting to the historical data. Estimated values thus obtained are reported in
table 1, while the fitted curve is shown in figure 1.
Parameter
q
b
p
K
c
δ
m
M
r0

Value
9.07979 10−7
2.55465
4, 300, 000$ / (106 pounds)
5, 000, 000$
200, 000$ / 1000 skate soaks
0.05
0.15
196.3923 106 pounds
0.543365

Table 1: Base case parameter set.
Following [18], we suppose that the system is affected by
stochasticity in the form of seasonal shocks wn that influence only the new recruitment part
xn+1 = f (sn , wn ) = (1 − m)sn + wn

r0 sn
. (12)
1 + sn /M

Instead of assuming an a priori probability distribution for
wn or trying to learn one from data (that in our case would
not be feasible given current scarce data availability), we
will make use of the framework developed in the previous
sections. In particular we will (a priori) assume that wn are
random variables all having the same finite support that we
will learn from data, but we will not make any assumption
on the actual weight distribution. With our data, we obtain
that wn ∈ [1 − 0.11, 1 + 0.06] = Iw .
For the economic part of the model, we start by modeling
the relationship between a harvest ht that brings the population level from xt to xt − ht and the effort Et needed to
accomplish this result. We will a priori assume that there is
a marginal effort involved, so that

5.2

Optimal Policy

By using the dynamic programming approach on the problem discretized with a step size of 0.25 × 106 pounds,
we compute the optimal policy for a management horizon of N = 33 years, that is the length of our original
time series. As predicted by Theorem 1, the optimal policy
π ∗ = {µ1 , . . . , µN } for the model we constructed for area
3A is a non stationary (S − s) policy. In figure 2(a) we plot
the function µ1 (·) to be used in the first year (the values of
S1 and s1 are 133 and 176.75 respectively). In words, the
optimal policy dictates that at period n a harvest is to be
undertaken if and only if the current stock level is greater
than sn ; in that case the stock is harvested down to Sn .
Optimal policy and escapement
500

Et =

Z

xt
xt −ht

1
dy
qy b

harvest
escapement

450

(13)

400

6

stock (10 pounds)

350
300
250
200
150

S

100
50
0

s
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

stock (106 pounds)

(a) Optimal rule for selecting harvests in the first year.
Optimal state and control trajectories
200
180
160
140

6

stock (10 pounds)

for some q and b. This is inspired by the fact that less effort is required when the stock is abundant, and can also
be interpreted as an integral of infinitesimal Cobb-Douglas
production functions (a standard economic model for productivity) where b and g are the corresponding elasticities.
Estimated values obtained by least squares fitting are reported in table 1, while the resulting curve is compared with
historical data in figure 1.
Costs involved in the Halibut fishery are divided into two
categories: fixed costs and variable costs. Fixed costs include costs that are independent of the number and the duration of the trips a vessel makes (therefore generically independent from the effort Et ). For example, vessel repairs
costs, license and insurance fees, mooring and dockage fees
are typically considered fixed costs. We will denote with
K the sum of all the fixed costs, that will be incurred if and
only if a harvest is undertaken.
Variable costs include all the expenses that are dependent
on the effort level. Variable costs typically include fuel,
maintenance, crew wages, gear repair and replacement. We
assume that the total variable costs are proportional to the
effort Et (measured in skate soaks) according to a constant
c. Parameter c is set to 200, 000$ for 1000 skate soaks
(200$/skate) as estimated in [2]. Following the analysis of
the historical variable and fixed costs for the halibut fishery
carried on in [11], we assume K = 5, 000, 000$ for area
3A. The unit price p for the halibut is set to 4, 300, 000$/
106 pounds, as in [2].
If we further assume a fixed discount rate δ = 0.05, we
obtain a formulation of management problem for the Halibut fishery in Area 3A that fits into the framework described in the previous section. In particular, the problem for an N years horizon is that of finding an admissible policy π = {µi }i∈[1,N ] that maximizes the revenue
π
CN
(x) where xRn is subject to (12), hn = µn (xn ) and
x
R(x) = px − c 0 qy1b dy.

stock
harvest

120
100
80
60
40
20
0

0

5

10

15
20
time (years)

25

30

35

(b) Stock trajectory and corresponding optimal harvests.

Figure 2: The optimal policy.
The trajectory of the system when it is managed using the
optimal policy is shown in figure 2, together with the corresponding optimal harvests. As we can see, the optimal policy is pulsing, in the sense that it involves periodic closures
of the fishery, when no harvest should be undertaken so that

the fish stock has time to recover. Of course, this kind of
policy could be acceptable in practice only in combination
with some rotation scheme among the different Areas, so
that a constant yearly production can be sustained.

Optimal state and control trajectories with rolling horizon
200
180
160
140

To see the advantage of the optimal (S − s) policy, we
compare it with the historical harvest proportions and with
a CPP policy that uses the historical average harvest rate
a = 0.1277. Table 2 summarizes the discounted revenues
corresponding to an initial stock size x1 = 90.989 million
pounds, that is the estimated stock size in 1975.
Policy
Optimal S − s
Historical rates
Average CPP
Rolling Horizon

Disc. revenue ($)
9.05141 × 108
7.06866 × 108
6.51849 × 108
8.73605 × 108

Loss ($)
−
1.98275 × 108
2.53292 × 108
3.1536 × 107

Table 2: Policy Comparison
Compared to the historical policy or the CPP policy, revenues for the optimal (S − s) policy are about 35% higher,
as reported in table 2. Notice that the comparison is done
assuming a worst case realization of the stochasticity, or in
other words that the nature is actively playing against the
manager.
Notice that the large harvest prescribed by the optimal
(S − s) policy in the last year is an artifact of the finite
horizon effect, caused by the fact that there is no reason
not to exhaust the resource at the end of the management
horizon (as long as it is profitable to harvest it). However
it does not affect the comparison significantly due to the
discount rate. In fact the (discounted) revenue for the entire last large harvest only accounts for less than 8% of the
total revenue. This is confirmed by looking at the results
obtained with a rolling horizon strategy that always picks
the optimal action with a 33-years long management horizon in mind. As shown in figure 3, this (suboptimal) strategy is not affected by the finite horizon effect. The rolling
horizon strategy still involves periodic closures of the fishery and significantly outperforms the historical policies, as
reported in table 2.
To further clarify that the pulsing nature of the optimal harvests is not an artifact of the finite horizon, it is also interesting to notice that the theoretical results on the optimality of (S − s) policies and the corresponding pulsing

stock (106 pounds)

This scheme is very different from the Constant Proportional Policy (CPP) that has been traditionally used to manage the Halibut fishery. In fact a CPP works by choosing
the yearly TAC as a fixed fraction of the current stock level
xt , and is aimed at maintaining the exploited stock size
(the escapement) at a given fixed level. This policy can
be seen as a simplified version of an (S − s) policy where
the two levels do not depend on the stage n and coincide,
thus defining the target stock size.

stock
harvest

120
100
80
60
40
20
0

0

5

10

15
20
time (years)

25

30

35

Figure 3: Harvests and stock trajectory with the rolling
horizon strategy.

harvests can be carried over to the infinite horizon case via
limiting arguments. The high level argument is that the optimal value function Cn (x) converges uniformly to C(x)
as n → ∞, while Pn (x) converges uniformly to a function
P (x) as n → ∞. Given that by Theorem 1 Pn (x) is continuous and K-concave for all n, we have that P (x) must be
also continuous and K-concave. Using an argument similar to the one developed in section 3.3 and by using Lemma
1, one can show that there exists S and s such that the optimal stationary policy for the infinite horizon problem is an
(S − s) policy.

6

Conclusions

In this paper, we have analyzed the optimality of (S−s) polices for a fairly general class of stochastic discrete-time resource allocation problems. When a non stationary (S − s)
policy is used, a harvest is undertaken at period n if and
only if the current stock level is greater than sn ; in that case
the stock is harvested down to Sn . The framework developed is quite general and can be applied to problems arising
in very different domains, such as natural resource management, crowdsourcing, pollution management. When assumptions of Theorem 1 are met, we have shown that there
exists a non stationary (S − s) policy that maximizes the
utility in a worst case scenario.
A fundamental advantage of the game theoretic approach
is that it completely avoids the problem of evaluating the
probability distributions of the random variables describing the uncertainty affecting those systems, a task that is
difficult or even impossible to accomplish in many practical circumstances. Given the consensus reached by the scientific community on the importance of understanding the
role of uncertainty when dealing with renewable resources,
we believe that worst-case scenario frameworks such as the

one described here provide new insights and will become
increasingly important.
To contribute to the effort of the Computational Sustainability community in tackling the fundamental sustainability challenges of our time, we consider an application of
our model to a marine natural resource. This type of natural resources are in fact widely believed to be endangered
due to over exploitation and generally poorly managed. Using Gulf of Alaska Pacific halibut data from the International Pacific halibut Commission (IPHC) annual reports,
we formulated a real world case study problem that fits into
our framework. In particular, our approach defines a policy
with a guaranteed lower bound on the utility function that is
structurally very different from the one currently employed.
As a future direction, we plan to study the effects of partial observability on the optimal policies by moving into a
POMDP framework. Moreover, we aim at extending the
results presented here to the multidimensional case by extending the theory on the so-called (σ, S) policies from the
inventory control literature.

7

Acknowledgments

This research is funded by NSF Expeditions in Computing
grant 0832782.

References

[9] S. Ermon, J. Conrad, C. Gomes, and B. Selman. Playing games against nature: optimal policies for renewable resources allocation. Technical report.
[10] C. Gomes.
Computational Sustainability Computational Methods for a Sustainable Environment,Economy, and Society. The Bridge, National
Academy of Engineering, 39(4), 2009.
[11] F.R. Homans and J.E. Wilen. A model of regulated
open access resource use. Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 32(1):1–21, 1997.
[12] R.A. Howard and J.E. Matheson. Risk-sensitive
Markov decision processes. Management Science,
18(7):356–369, 1972.
[13] T. Lauck, C.W. Clark, M. Mangel, and G.R. Munro.
Implementing the precautionary principle in fisheries
management through marine reserves. Ecological Applications, 8(sp1):72–78, 1998.
[14] M.L. Littman. Markov games as a framework for
multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings
of the eleventh international conference on machine
learning, volume 157, page 163. Citeseer, 1994.
[15] S.I.
Marcus,
E.
Fernández-Gaucherand,
D. Hernández-Hernandez, S. Coraluppi, and P. Fard.
Risk sensitive Markov decision processes. Systems
and Control in the Twenty-First Century, 29, 1997.

[1] Review of the state of world marine fishery resources.
FAO Fisheries Technical Paper - T457.

[16] G. Owen. Game theory. Third Edition. Academic
Press, 1995.

[2] M. Ang, Jon M. Conrad, and David R. Just. Proportional Harvest Policies: An Application to the Pacific
Halibut. Technical report.

[17] W.J. Reed. A stochastic model for the economic management of a renewable animal resource. Mathematical Biosciences, 22(1):313–337, 1974.

[3] A. Ben-Tal and A. Nemirovski. Robust optimization–
methodology and applications. Mathematical Programming, 92(3):453–480, 2002.

[18] W.J. Reed. Optimal escapement levels in stochastic
and deterministic harvesting models. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 6(4):350–
363, 1979.

[4] D.P. Bertsekas. Dynamic programming and optimal
control. Athena Scientific Belmont, MA, 1995.
[5] D. Bertsimas and M. Sim. Robust discrete optimization and network flows. Mathematical Programming,
98(1):49–71, 2003.
[6] C.W. Clark. Mathematical bioeconomics: the optimal management of renewable resources. Wiley New
York:, 1990.
[7] J.M. Conrad. Resource economics. Cambridge University Press, 1999.
[8] L. Doyen and C. Béné. Sustainability of fisheries
through marine reserves: a robust modeling analysis.
Journal of Environmental Management, 69(1):1–13,
2003.

[19] H. Scarf. The Optimality of (S, s) Policies in the
Dynamic Inventory Problem. Stanford mathematical
studies in the social sciences, page 196, 1960.

