Kanazawa, 1989) are used to represent compactly the
transition and the reward functions by exploiting the
dependencies between variables composing a state.
Solution methods adapted from classical techniques
such as dp or Linear Programming (lp) have been
proposed (Hoey et al., 1999; Boutilier et al., 2000;
Guestrin et al., 2003) and successfully tested on large
stochastic planning problems. Moreover, model-based
learning methods (Guestrin et al., 2002) have been
proposed to learn the parameters of the model within

In this paper, we describe Structured dyna (sdyna),
a general framework merging supervised learning algorithms with planning methods within the fmdp framework. sdyna does not require to explicitly build the
global structure of the dbns. More precisely, we focus
on spiti, an instantiation of sdyna, that uses decision
trees as factored representations. spiti directly learns
local structures of dbns based on an incremental decision tree induction algorithm, namely iti (Incremental
Tree Inducer (Utgoff et al., 1997)). These representations are simultaneously exploited by a modified incremental version of the Structured Value Iteration (svi)
algorithm (Boutilier et al., 2000) computing a policy
executed by the agent.
In the context of incremental decision tree induction,
we use χ2 as a test of independence between two probability distributions (Quinlan, 1986) to build a model
of the transition and reward functions. The χ2 threshold used to split two distributions directly impact the
size of the model learned and may be critical in finding a good policy. First, we show that, setting the χ2
threshold to a high value makes spiti able to build a
compact model without impacting the quality of its
policy. Second, we show that, while keeping its model
compact, spiti exploits the generalization property in
its model learning method to perform better than a
stochastic version of dyna-q (Sutton, 1990), a tabular
model-based rl method. Finally, we introduce a new
measure of the accuracy of the transition model based

on χ2 to study the generalization property of spiti.
We show that the accuracy of the model learned by
spiti decreases linearly when the size of the problem
grows exponentially.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
in Section 2, we introduce fmdps. In Section 3, we
describe the sdyna framework. In Section 4, we describe spiti and explain how we exploit χ2 in model
learning and evaluation. Section 5 describes empirical
results with spiti. We discuss these results in Section 6. We conclude and describe some future work
within the sdyna framework in Section 7.

2

3

Similarly to the dyna architecture (Sutton, 1990),
sdyna proposes to integrate planning, acting and
learning to solve by trial-and-error stochastic rl problem with unknown transition and reward functions.
However, sdyna uses fmdps as a representation language to be able to address large rl problems. An
overview of sdyna is given in Figure 1.
Input: Acting, Learn, P lan, Fact
Output: ∅
1. Initialization
2. At each time step t, do:

BACKGROUND

A mdp is defined by a tuple hS, A, R, P i. S is a finite set of states, A is a finite set of actions, R is the
immediate reward function with R : S × A → IR and
P is the Markovian transition function P (s0 |s, a) with
P : S × A × S → [0, 1]. A stationary policy π is a
mapping S → A with π(s) defining the action to be
taken in state s. Considering an infinite horizon, we
evaluate a policy π in state s with the value function
Vπ (s) definedPusing the discounted reward criterion:
∞
Vπ (s) = Eπ [ t=0 γ t · rt |s0 = s], with 0 ≤ γ < 1 the
discount factor and rt the reward obtained at time t.
The action-value function Qπ (s, a) is defined as:
X
Qπ (s, a) =
P (s0 |s, a)(R(s0 , a) + γVπ (s0 )) (1)
s0 ∈S

A policy π is optimal if for all s ∈ S and all policies π 0 ,
Vπ > Vπ0 . The value function of any optimal policy is
called the optimal value function and is noted V ∗ .
The factored mdp framework (Boutilier et al., 1995) is
a representation language exploiting the structure of
the problem to represent compactly large mdps with
factored representations. In a fmdp, states are composed of a set of random variables {X1 , . . . , Xn } with
each Xi taking its value in a finite domain Dom(Xi ).
A state is defined by a vector of values s = (x1 , . . . , xn )
with for all i: xi ∈ Dom(Xi ). The state transition
model Ta of an action a is defined by a transition
graph Ga represented as a dbn (Dean & Kanazawa,
1989). Ga is a two-layer directed acyclic graph whose
nodes are {X1 , . . . , Xn , X10 , . . . , Xn0 } with Xi a variable at time t and Xi0 the same variable at time t + 1.
The parents of Xi0 are noted P arentsa (Xi0 ). We
assume that P arentsa (Xi0 ) ⊆ X (i.e. there are no
synchronic arcs, that is arcs from Xi0 to Xj0 ). A
graph Ga is quantified by a Conditional Probability
Distribution CPDaXi (Xi0 |P arentsa (Xi0 )) associated to
each node Xi0 ∈ Ga . The transition model T of
the fmdp is then defined by a separate dbn model
Ta = hGa , {CPDaX1 , . . . , CPDaXn }i for each action a.

SDYNA

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

s ← current (non-terminal) state
a ← Acting(s, {Fact(Qt−1 (s, a)), a ∈ A})
Execute a; observe s0 and r
Fact(Mt ) ← Learn(Fact(Mt−1 ), s, a, s0 , r)
{Fact(Vt ), {Fact(Qt (s, a)), a ∈ A}} ←
P lan(Fact(Mt ), Fact(Vt−1 ))

with Mt the model of the transition and reward functions at time t.

Figure 1: The sdyna algorithm
Neither the fmdp framework nor sdyna specify which
factored representations should be used. Factored representations, noted Fact(F ) in sdyna, can exploit certain regularities in the represented function F . These
representations include rules, decision trees or algebraic decision diagrams. sdyna is decomposed in
three phases: acting (steps 2.a, 2.b and 2.c), learning
(steps 2.d) and planning (steps 2.e). The next section
details these phases in the context of an instantiation
of sdyna named spiti.

4

SPITI

spiti uses decision trees as factored representations
(noted Tree(F )). Section 4.1 and Section 4.2 describe,
respectively, the acting and planning phases and then
the learning phase in spiti.
4.1

ACTING AND PLANNING

Acting in spiti is similar to acting in other rl algorithms. The planning phase builds the set SQ
of action-value functions Tree(Qt−1 (s, a)) representing
the expected discounted reward for taking action a in
state s and then following a greedy policy. Thus, the
agent can behave greedily by executing the best action
in all states. spiti uses the -greedy exploration policy which executes the best action most of the time,
and, with a small probability , selects uniformly at

Planning has been implemented using an incremental
version of the svi algorithm (Boutilier et al., 2000).
svi is adapted from the Value Iteration algorithm but
using decision trees as factored representations instead
of tabular representations. spiti uses an incremental
version of svi rather than the original svi for two reasons. First, svi returns a greedy policy, which may
not be adequate for exploration policies other than
-greedy. Second, svi computes an evaluation of the
value function until convergence despite an incomplete
and incrementally updated model of the transition and
reward functions. The modified version of svi used in
spiti is described in Figure 2.
Input: Tree(M ), Tree(Tt ), Tree(Vt−1 )
Output: Tree(Vt ), {Tree(Qt (s, a)), a ∈ A}
1. SQ = {Tree(Qt (s, a)), a ∈ A} with:
Tree(Qt (s, a)) ← Regress(Tree(M ), Tree(Vt−1 ), a)
2. Tree(Vt ) ← M erge(SQ ) (using maximization over the
value as combination function).
3. Return {Tree(Vt ), SQ }

Figure 2: spiti

(1)

: the P lan algorithm based on svi.

At each time step, the P lan algorithm in spiti updates set SQ by producing the action-value function Tree(Qt (s, a)) with respect to the value function
Tree(Vt−1 ) using the Regress operator (step 1) defined
in Boutilier et al. (2000). Then, action-value functions Tree(Qt (s, a)) are merged using maximization
as combination function to compute the value function Tree(Vt ) associated with a greedy policy using the
M erge({T1 , . . . , Tn }) operator. This operator is used
to produce a single tree containing all the partitions
occurring in all trees T1 , . . . , Tn to be merged, and
whose leaves are labeled using a combination function
of the labels of the corresponding leaves in the original
trees. Tree(Vt ) is reused at time t+1 to update the set
SQ of action-value functions Tree(Qt+1 (s, a)). We refer to Boutilier et al. (2000) for a detailed description
of the M erge and Regress operators.
4.2

LEARNING THE STRUCTURE

Trials of the agent compose a stream of examples that
must be learned incrementally. In spiti, we use incremental decision tree induction algorithms (Utgoff,
1986), noted LearnT ree. From a stream of examples
hA, ςi, with A a set of attributes νi and ς the class of
the example, LearnT ree(Tree(F ), A, ς) builds a decision tree Tree(F ) representing a factored representation of the probability F (ς|A).
As shown in Figure 3 (step 3), the reward learning

Input: Tree(Mt ), s, a, s, r Output: Tree(Mt+1 )
1. Tree(Mt+1 ) ← Tree(Mt )
2. A ← {x1 , . . . , xn }
3. Tree(R ∈ Mt+1 ) ←
S
LearnT ree(Tree(R ∈ Mt ), A {a}, r)
4. For all i ∈ |X|:
Tree(CPDaXi ∈ Mt+1 ) ←
LearnT ree(Tree(CPDaXi ∈ Mt ), A, x0i )
5. Return Tree(Mt+1 )

Figure 3: spiti

: the Learn(s, a, s, r) algorithm.

(2)

algorithm is straightforward. From an observation
of the agent hs, a, ri with s = (x1 , . . . , xn ), we use
LearnT ree to learn a factored representation Tree(R)
of the reward function R(s, a) from the example hA =
(x1 , . . . , xn , a), ς = ri.
The transition model T is composed of a dbn Ga for
each action a. Ga is quantified with the set of local
structures in the conditional probability distributions
CPDa = (CPDaX1 , . . . , CPDaXn )1 . Assuming no synchronic arc in Ga (we have Xi0 Xj0 | X1 , . . . , Xn ),
spiti uses LearnT ree to learn separately a decision
tree representation of each CPDaXi from the observation of the agent hs, a, s0 i with s = (x1 , . . . , xn ) and
s0 = (x01 , . . . , x0n ), as shown in Figure 3 (step 4). Thus,
the explicit representation of the global structure of
dbns representing the transition functions is not built.
|=

random an action, independently of SQ .

The LearnT ree algorithm has been implemented using iti (Utgoff et al., 1997) with χ2 as an informationtheoric metric, as described in the next section. We
refer to Utgoff et al. (1997) for a detailed description of iti. Ga is quantified by Tree(CPDaXi )
associated to each node Xi0 .
LearnT ree computes an approximation of the conditional probability
CPDaXi (Xi0 |P arentsa (Xi0 )) from the training examples
present at each leaf of Tree(CPDaXi ) built by iti. The
model Tree(M ) learned is then used in planning (Figure 2) to compute set SQ of action-value functions.
4.3

USING CHI-SQUARE TO DETECT
THE DEPENDENCIES

spiti uses χ2 as an information-theoric metric to determine the best test Tνi to install at a decision node.
Once Tνi has been selected, we use χ2 as a test of
independence between two probability distributions
1

Instead of having a different Tree(CPDaXi ) for each
action and for each variable, one may maintain only one
Tree(CPDXi ) for each variable by adding the action a to
the set of attributes A. We did not consider this case in
this paper.

to avoid training data overfitting (Quinlan, 1986).
Thus, a test Tνi on the binary attribute νi is installed
only if the χ2 value computed for both probabilities
F (ς|νi = true) and F (ς|νi = f alse) is above a threshold, noted τχ2 , determining whether or not the node
must be split into two different leaves.
Neither planning nor acting in spiti require to build an
explicit representation of the global structure of dbns
Ga . However, as shown in Figure 4, one may build
such a representation by assigning to P arentsa (Xi0 )
the set of variables Xi corresponding to the attributes
νj used in the tests in each Tree(CPDaXi ).
T ree(CP DX0 ):

0.8

T ree(CP DX1 ):
X1
T rue
F alse
0.8

1.0

1.0

X0

X00

X1

X10

X2

X20

Time t

T ree(CP DX2 ):
X2

with ∆Vl the label of the leaf l and Sl the size of the
state space represented by l.

X1

0.8

and Vπ as the average of the relative value error ∆V =
(V ∗ − Vπ )/V ∗ (with V ∗ ≥ Vπ ). We compute ξπ with
operators using tree representations. Given a policy
Tree(π) to evaluate, we use the Structured Successive
Approximation (ssa) algorithm (Boutilier et al., 2000)
based on the exact transitions and reward functions to
compute its associated value function Tree(Vπ ). Then,
from set S∆V = {Tree(V ∗ ), Tree(Vπ )}, we first compute Tree(∆Vπ ) using the M erge(S∆V ) operator and
using as combination function ∆V , the relative value
error. Then, ξπ is computed according to:
P
l∈Tree(∆Vπ ) ∆Vl · Sl
(2)
ξπ = Q
i∈|X| |Dom(Xi )|

0.3

Time t + 1

Figure 4: Structure of a dbn G from a set of decision
trees {Tree(CPDXi )}. In Tree(CPDX2 ), the leaf labeled 0.3 means that the probability for X20 to be true
is P (X20 |X1 = F alse, X2 = F alse) = 0.3.
spiti is initialized with a set of empty Tree(CPDaXi ),
assuming when it starts that the variables Xi0 are all
independent. When an attribute νj is installed at a
decision node, a new dependency of Xi0 to the variable
Xj associated with νj is defined.

4.4.2

Accuracy of the Model

We introduce the measure Qχ2 to qualify the accuracy
of the model learned by spiti. The accuracy of the
model is complementary to the relative error because
it evaluates the model learned in spiti independently
of the reward function. Qχ2 is defined as:
P
P
a∈A
i∈|X| σa,i
Q
Qχ2 =
(3)
|A| ∗ i∈|X| |Dom(Xi )|
with σa,i defined in Figure 5.
Input: a, i ∈ |X| Output: σa,i
1. σa,i = 0
2. M erge({T reedef (CPDaXi ), T reet (CPDaXi )}) using as
a combination function:
σa,i = σa,i + Q(χ2(X 0 ,a,s0 ) ) · Sl
i

4.4

EVALUATING SPITI

We show in Section 5 that spiti performs better than a
stochastic version of dyna-q (Sutton, 1990) in terms
of discounted reward and size of the model built in
structured rl problems. The reward and transition
functions and the optimal value function are known
for these problems. Based on that knowledge, additional criteria may be used, namely the relative error
(Section 4.4.1) and the accuracy of the model (Section 4.4.2) to improve the evaluation of spiti. These
criteria respectively measure how good a policy is compared to an optimal policy, and how accurate is the
model of transitions learned by spiti.
4.4.1

Relative Error

The optimal value function V ∗ , computed off-line using svi, may be used as a reference to evaluate a policy. We define the relative error, noted ξπ , between V ∗

with Sl the size of the state space represented by lt and
Q(χ2(X 0 ,a,s0 ) ) the probability associated with the value
i

χ2(X 0 ,a,s0 ) computed from the probability Pdef (Xi ) lai
beling the leaf in T reedef (CPDaXi ) and Pt (Xi0 |s, a) labeling the leaf lt
3. Return σa,i

Figure 5: Computation of σa,i used in the evaluation
of the model learned by spiti.
The values χ2(X 0 ,a,s0 ) and Q(χ2(X 0 ,a,s0 ) ) are computed
i
i
using implementations proposed in Press et al. (1992)
with 1 degree of freedom. The probability Q(χ2(X 0 ,a,s0 ) )
i
is computed for each leaf and weighted with the size
of the state space represented by the leaf, penalizing
errors in the model that covers a large part of the
state space. The average is obtained by dividing the
weighted sum by the number of state/action pairs.

RESULTS

We present three different analyses based on empirical
evaluations of spiti. The first analysis studies the relation between the value of the threshold τχ2 and the
size of the model built by spiti on one hand, and between τχ2 and the relative error of the value function
of the induced greedy policy on the other hand. The
second analysis compares spiti to dyna-q in terms
of discounted reward and model size. The last analysis studies the generalization property of the model
learning process in spiti.

πJ ,τ based on MJ ,τ is computed off-line using svi.
Finally, we compute the relative error ξπ as described
in Section 4.4.1.
0.40
0.35
0.30

Relative error

5

Coffee Robot
Process Planning

1600

0.15

0.05
0.00

1400

Number of nodes

Coffee Robot
Process Planning

0.20

0.10

1800

0

1

2

3
4
5
Value of the threshold

6

7

8

1200
1000

Figure 7: Relative error induced from the model
learned in spiti on the Coffee Robot and Process Planning problems. The value of τχ2 has a limited impact
on the policy generated by spiti.

800
600
400
200
0
0

1

2

3
4
5
Value of the threshold

6

7

8

Figure 6: Number of nodes of the model learned in
spiti on the Coffee Robot and Process Planning problems. A high value of τχ2 decreases significantly the
size of the model learned.
These analyses are run on a set of stochastic problems
defined in Boutilier et al. (2000). A set of initial states
and a set of terminal states are added to the problem
definitions to let the agent perform multiple trials during an experiment. When an agent is in a terminal
state, its new state is randomly initialized in one of
the initial states. The set of initial states is composed
of all the non-terminal states from which there is at
least one policy reaching a terminal state. We run 20
experiments for each analysis. When required, we use
svi to compute off-line optimal policy using the span
semi-norm as a termination criterion and ssa with the
supremum norm as a termination criterion. We use
γ = 0.9 for both algorithms.
5.1

0.25

CHI-SQUARE THRESHOLD

In order to study the influence of τχ2 on the quality
of the policy, we use the following protocol: first, a
random trajectory J is executed for T = 4000 time
steps. Second, the value of τχ2 is fixed and a transition
and reward model MJ ,τ is built from the trajectory
by spiti as described in Section 4.2. Third, a policy

The first empirical study is done on Coffee Robot
and Process Planning. Both problems are defined in
Boutilier et al. (2000) and the complete definition of
their reward and transition functions is available on
the spudd website2 . Coffee Robot is a stochastic problem composed of 4 actions and 6 boolean variables. It
represents a robot that must go to a café and buy some
coffee to deliver it to its owner. The robot reaches a
terminal state when its owner has a coffee. Process
Planning is a stochastic problem composed of 14 actions and 17 binary variables (1, 835, 008 state/action
pairs). A factory must achieve manufactured components by producing, depending on the demand, high
quality components (using actions such as hand-paint
or drill) or low quality components (using actions such
as spray-paint or glue).
Figure 6 shows the size of the transition model built by
spiti on the Coffee Robot and Process Planning problems for different values of τχ2 . It illustrates the impact
of τχ2 on the number of nodes created in the trees and,
consequently, on the number of dependencies between
the variables of the fmdp. On both problems, the size
of the model is at least divided by 2 for high values of
τχ2 as compared to low values.
Whereas the value of τχ2 has a significant impact on
the size of the model, it has a much more limited impact on the generated policy πJ ,τ , as shown in Figure 7. Despite decreasing model sizes, the relative error EJ ,τ computed for πJ ,τ increases only slightly on
2

http://www.cs.ubc.ca/spider/jhoey/spudd/spudd.html

both Coffee Robot and Process Planning problems.

9000

Noisy Noise:20%
Noisy Noise:40%

8000

6000
5000
4000

5.2

3000
2000
1000
0
0

1

2

3
4
5
Value of the threshold

6

7

8

Figure 8: Size of the model learned in spiti on the
Noisy problems with two different levels of noise. A
high value of τχ2 decreases significantly the size of the
model learned.
To examine the consequences of the threshold τχ2 on
a very stochastic problem, we define a problem named
Noisy. Boutilier et al. (2000) define two problems,
namely Linear and Expon, to illustrate respectively
the best and worst case scenario for spi. The transition
and reward functions of Noisy are defined according to
the definition of the Linear problem with a constant
level of noise on all existing transitions. We present
additional results about spiti in the Linear , Expon
and Noisy problems in Section 5.3.

DISCOUNTED REWARD

In this study, we compare spiti to a stochastic implementation of dyna-q (Sutton, 1990) on Coffee Robot
and Process Planning. We use γ = 0.9 and a -greedy
exploration policy with a fixed  = 0.1 for both dynaq and spiti. In dyna-q, we used α = 1.0, the number
of planning steps is set to twice the size of the model,
and Q(s, a) is initialized optimistically (with high values). In spiti, the results of the previous section show
that a high value for the threshold τχ2 is appropriate.
Thus, we set τχ2 = 7, 88 (corresponding to a probability of independence of 0.995).

25

20

Discounted reward

Number of nodes

7000

the impact of the threshold τχ2 is more important
than in the previous problems Coffee Robot and Process Planning which contain some deterministic transitions. spiti builds a model from more than 9000
nodes to less than 300 nodes for an identical trajectory. Figure 9 shows that on the Noisy problem, a
more compact transition model generates a better policy than a larger transition model, even if this model
has been learned from the same trajectory.

15

Optimal
DynaQ
Random
Spiti

10

5

Noisy Noise:20%
Noisy Noise:40%

0.8

0
0

Relative error

0.7

0.6

500

1000

1500

2000
Time

2500

3000

3500

4000

Figure 10: Discounted reward obtained on the Coffee
Robot problem. dyna-q and spiti execute quickly a
near optimal policy on this small problem.

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2
0

1

2

3
4
5
Value of the threshold

6

7

8

Figure 9: Relative error induced from the model
learned in spiti on the Noisy problem with two different levels of noise.
Figure 8 shows that for a very stochastic problem,
namely Noisy with two levels of noise, 20% and 40%,
with a fixed size of 8 binary variables and actions,

We also use as reference two agents noted random
and optimal, executing respectively a random action
and the best action at each time step. The discounted
disc
reward is defined as Rtdisc = rt + γ 0 Rt−1
with rt the
0
reward received by the agent and γ = 0.993 .
Figure 10 shows the discounted reward Rdisc obtained
by the agents on the Coffee Robot problem. On this
small problem, both dyna-q and spiti quickly execute
a near optimal policy. However, the model learned by
3
We use γ 6= γ 0 to make the results illustrating Rdisc
more readable.

spiti is composed of approximately 90 nodes whereas
dyna-q builds a model of 128 nodes, that is the number of transitions in the problem4 .

1.0

0.9

Accuracy of the model

0.8
80
70

Discounted reward

60
50

Optimal
DynaQ
Random
Spiti

40

10

500

1000

1500

2000
Time

2500

3000

3500

4000

Figure 11: Discounted reward obtained on the Process Planning problem. spiti executes quickly a near
optimal policy in a large structured problem, unlike
dyna-q.
Figure 11 shows the discounted reward Rdisc obtained
by the agents on the Process Planning problem. spiti
is able to execute a near optimal policy in approximately 2000 time steps, whereas dyna-q only starts
to improve its policy after 4000 time steps. Comparing the size of the transition model learned, dyna-q
builds a representation of approximately 2500 nodes
which would keep growing if the experiment was continued whereas spiti builds a structured representation stabilized to less than 700 nodes.
GENERALIZATION IN MODEL
LEARNING IN SPITI

In this third study, we use Qχ2 to qualify the loss of
accuracy of the model built by the Learn algorithm
(Figure 3) when the size of a problem grows whereas
the experience of the agent does not. We use the following protocol: first, a random trajectory J is executed in the environment for T = 4000 time steps.
T
Then, we compute QJ
χ2 with the transition model MJ
built from the trajectory J by spiti (as described in
Section 4.2) and the actual definition of the problem.
Finally, we restart using the same problem with one
more action and one more binary variable. We use
a random trajectory in this experiment to avoid any
dependency to the reward function learning process.
The experiment is run on the three following problems:
Linear , Expon and Noisy, using a level of noise of
4

0.5

0.3
4

20

5.3

0.6

0.4

30

0
0

0.7

A terminal state does not have transitions.

Expon
Linear
Noisy
6

8

10

12
14
Problem size

16

18

20

Figure 12: Accuracy of the model learned by spiti after T = 4000 time steps on problems with variable size.
The accuracy decreases linearly whereas the size of the
problem grows exponentially (from 64 to 20, 971, 520
state/action pairs).
20%. We used τχ2 = 7, 88 to build the model MJT .
The size of the problem grows from 24 · 4 = 64 to
220 · 20 = 20, 971, 520 state/action pairs. Figure 12
shows that the accuracy Qχ2 of the model built by
spiti decreases linearly with the size of the problems.

6

DISCUSSION

sdyna is an architecture designed to integrate planning, learning and acting in fmdps. In this paper, we
have focused on spiti, an instantiation of sdyna, that
uses decision trees as factored representation. spiti simultaneously learns a structured model of the reward
and transition functions and uses an incremental version of svi to compute its policy.
spiti learns the structure of a rl problem using χ2 as
a test of independence between two probability distributions. We have first shown that the threshold τχ2
used to determine whether or not new dependencies
should be added to the transition model has a significant impact on the size of the model learned and
a more limited impact on the quality of the policy
generated by spiti (Section 5.1). Moreover, figure 8
and figure 9 show that setting τχ2 to a low value may
not be adapted in very stochastic problems. Indeed,
large models may contain unnecessary dependencies
and, consequently, require more samples to be accurately quantified. When setting τχ2 to a high value,
spiti is able to build a compact representation of the
transition and reward functions of the problem without degrading its policy.
Second, we have shown that spiti is able to learn the

structure of rl problems with more than one million
state/action pairs and performs better than dyna-q.
Unlike tabular learning algorithms, decision tree induction algorithms build factored representations that
endow the agent with a generalization property. The
decision trees used to represent the transition and reward functions in spiti propose a default class distribution for examples that have not been presented.
Consequently, an agent may be able to choose adequate actions in states not visited yet. As we have
shown in Section 5.2, the generalization property in
spiti accelerates the resolution of large rl problems.
Third, we have used an accuracy measure to study the
generalization property of transition model learning in
spiti. We have shown that for a constant number of
time steps, the accuracy of the model built by spiti decreases linearly when the number of state/action pairs
in the problem grows exponentially. This result indicates that spiti is able to scale well in larger structured
rl problems.
spiti has been evaluated using three different criteria: the relative error ξπ , the discounted reward Rdisc
and the accuracy measure Qχ2 . Two of these criteria
cannot be applied in real world rl problems: the relative error requires to know the optimal value function
whereas the accuracy measure requires to know the exact transition function of the problem. Moreover, the
discounted reward is the only criterion that takes into
account the loss of reward received due to the exploration policy. Thus, ξπ and Qχ2 are complementary to
Rdisc that fully evaluates all the parameters of spiti
and may be used on all kind of rl problems.

7

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE
WORK

We have described in this paper a general approach
to model-based rl in the context of fmdps, assuming that the structure of problems is unknown. We
have presented an instantiation of this approach called
spiti. Our results show empirically that spiti performs better than a tabular model-based rl algorithm
by learning a compact representation of the problem
from which it can derive a good policy, exploiting the
generalization property of its learning method, particularly when the problem gets larger.
However, spiti is currently limited by its exploration
policy, -greedy, and its planning method, adapted
from svi. We are currently working on integrating
other model-based learning (Guestrin et al., 2002) and
planning (Hoey et al., 1999; Guestrin et al., 2003)
methods in fmdps to address larger problems than
those addressed in this paper.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We wish to thank Christophe Marsala and Vincent
Corruble for useful discussions. Thanks to the anonymous referees for their helpful suggestions.

References
Boutilier, C., Dearden, R., & Goldszmidt, M. (1995). Exploiting Structure in Policy Construction. Proceedings of
the Fourteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-95) (pp. 1104–1111). Montreal.
Boutilier, C., Dearden, R., & Goldszmidt, M. (2000).
Stochastic Dynamic Programming with Factored Representations. Artificial Intelligence, 121, 49–107.
Chickering, D. M., Heckerman, D., & Meek, C. (1997). A
Bayesian Approach to Learning Bayesian Networks with
Local Structure. Proceedings of the 13th International
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (pp.
80–89).
Dean, T., & Kanazawa, K. (1989). A Model for Reasoning
about Persistence and Causation. Computational Intelligence, 5, 142–150.
Friedman, N., & Goldszmidt, M. (1998).
Learning
Bayesian Networks with Local Structure. Learning and
Inference in Graphical Models. M. I. Jordan ed.
Guestrin, C., Koller, D., Parr, R., & Venkataraman,
S. (2003). Efficient Solution Algorithms for Factored
MDPs. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 19,
399–468.
Guestrin, C., Patrascu, R., & Schuurmans, D. (2002).
Algorithm-Directed Exploration for Model-Based Reinforcement Learning in Factored MDPs. ICML-2002 The
Nineteenth International Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 235–242).
Hoey, J., St-Aubin, R., Hu, A., & Boutilier, C. (1999).
SPUDD: Stochastic Planning using Decision Diagrams.
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Conference on Uncertainty
in Artificial Intelligence (pp. 279–288). Morgan Kaufmann.
Press, W. H., Flannery, B. P., Teukolsky, S. A., & Vetterling, W. T. (1992). Numerical Recipes: The Art of
Scientific Computing. Cambridge University Press.
Quinlan, J. R. (1986). Induction of Decision Trees. Machine Learning, 1, 81–106.
Sutton, R. S. (1990). Integrated architectures for learning,
planning, and reacting based on approximating dynamic
programming. Proceedings of the Seventh International
Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 216–224). San
Mateo, CA. Morgan Kaufmann.
Utgoff, P. (1986). Incremental Induction of Decision Trees.
Machine Learning, 4, 161–186.
Utgoff, P. E., Nerkman, N. C., & Clouse, J. A. (1997). Decision Tree Induction Based on Efficient Tree Restructuring. Machine Learning, 29, 5–44.

