Daphne Koller
Computer Science Dept.
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305

depends strongly on the density of the GMRF structure.
Finally, the number of parameters that need to be stored
can be an important computational factor in some settings.
These latter issues are particularly relevant in systems, such
as speech recognition (Bilmes, 2000) or tracking (BarShalom & Fortmann, 1988), that need to achieve real-time
performance. Sparsity can also be beneficial in a knowledge discovery setting, where the structure of the learned
model may provide insight into the relationships between
the variables. For example, sparse Gaussian models have
been successfully used to explore interactions between the
genes in gene expression data (Dobra et al., 2004).
The idea of learning sparse GRMFs goes back to the work
of Dempster (1972) where elements of the inverse covariance matrix are explicitly set to zero and the remaining parameters learned from data. Other early work used a greedy
forward/backward search over edges in a Gaussian MRF
that quickly became infeasible as n, the dimension of the
problem, grew (Lauritzen, 1996). More recently, Banerjee et al. (2006) formulated the problem as one of optimizing a log-likelihood objective regularized with an ℓ1 norm penalty on the entries. This penalty is known (Tibshirani, 1996) to push parameters to zero, inducing sparsity. (See Section 2 for more details on this and other other
approaches for learning sparse GMRFs.)
In this paper, we present a new algorithm for optimizing the
ℓ1 -penalized log-likelihood objective for Gaussian distributions. Our approach is based on projected gradient methods originally proposed by Levitin and Polyak (1966). Like
other methods based on this objective, our method exploits
the fact that the objective is tractable and convex, hence
avoiding problems from greedy or heuristic searches. However, unlike the work of Banerjee et al. (2006), the complexity of our algorithm grows as O(n3 ) rather than O(n4 )
per iteration. For problems of high dimension, this orderof-magnitude reduction in complexity can be significant.
We also generalize the sparse inverse covariance problem
to that of estimating an inverse covariance with block sparsity. This task corresponds to finding a Gaussian MRF
in which certain groups of edges should all be penalized

together. For example, in a GMRF over genes, we may
want to jointly penalize any interaction between genes in
two pathways; this penalty intuitively tries to reduce interpathway interactions, but once the two pathways are allowed to interact via one pair of genes, the penalty is removed for all other pairs. To our knowledge, this extension has not been considered elsewhere. Indeed, previous
methods do not naturally handle this setting, whereas our
method handles it easily, with no real increase in computational cost. We present results demonstrating the value
of the block structure to two distinct applications: learning
networks over genes from gene expression data, and learning models of the 2D shape of mammals.

2

Background and Related Work

As mentioned above, the literature on estimating covariance matrices from data has a long history. Our work starts
from the formulation of Banerjee et al. (2006) which we
review below. We then compare this approach to several
other recent works.
2.1 ℓ1 -Regularized Problem Formulation
We assume that we are given a dataset D =
{x[1], . . . , x[m]} in which the samples x ∈ D are drawn
from some n-dimensional Gaussian distribution N (µ, Σ).
Given a Gaussian with mean µ and covariance Σ, the average log-likelihood (modulo unnecessary constants) for D
with same mean can be written as
log det K − tr(Σ̂K)
where K = Σ−1 isP
the inverse covariance matrix for the
m
1
T
model, and Σ̂ = m
i=1 (x[i] − µ) (x[i] − µ) is the empirical covariance of the dataset D. As we discussed, the
sparsity structure in the matrix K defines the structure of
the GMRF corresponding to this Gaussian: a zero entry
Kij corresponds precisely to the absence of an edge between the variables i and j. For uniformity of exposition,
we use the matrix terminology and notation in the remainder of our discussion.
Following the approach of Banerjee et al., we add sparsitypromoting ℓ1 -penalty to the entries of the inverse covariance. We can now formulate the convex optimization problem for estimating the inverse covariance of our model:
X
minimize − log det(K) + tr(Σ̂K) +
λij |Kij |, (1)
K≻0

i,j

where we use the notation A ≻ 0 to indicate that the symmetric matrix A is positive definite. Here λij controls the
sparsity of the solution to (1). As we show in Lemma 1, so
long as λij > 0 for all i 6= j (and λii ≥ 0) the solution
to (1) is unique and positive definite. Furthermore, if λij is
large enough, we will force all off-diagonal entries of K to
zero.
It will be instructive now and for later development in the
paper to take the dual of (1). We introduce an auxiliary vari-

able Z = K and its associated dual variable W ∈ Rn×n ,
leading to the Lagrangian
L(K, Z, W )

= − log det(K) + tr(Σ̂K)
X
+
λij |Zij | + tr(W (K − Z)).
i,j

The above Lagrangian is separable into terms involving K
and terms involving Z, which enables us to find the dual.
For the terms involving Z we have that

X
0 if |Wij | ≤ λij
λij |Zij | − tr(W Z) =
inf
−∞ otherwise.
Z
ij

The infimum over K for the remaining terms can be found
by using ∇K log det(K) = K −1 (and assuming that Σ̂ +
W ≻ 0) to give
inf [− log det(K)+tr((Σ̂+W )K)] = log det(Σ̂+W )+n
K

Combining, we get the following dual problem for (1):
maximize log det(Σ̂ + W )
subject to |Wij | ≤ λij ∀i, j.

(2)

The constraint that Σ̂ + W ≻ 0 is implicit in the objective
because of the convention that log det(X) = −∞ when
X 6≻ 0. We denote the set {W : |Wij | ≤ λij ∀i, j} by Bλ ,
which is a box constraint indexed by the tuple λ = (λij ).
The duality gap given a dual feasible point W ∈ Bλ (and
hence the primal point K = (Σ̂ + W )−1 ) is
X
η = tr(Σ̂K) +
λij |Kij | − n.
ij

Based on the dual problem, we prove the following lemma,
which guarantees a solution to problem (1):
Lemma 1. With probability 1, so long as λij > 0 for all
i 6= j and λii ≥ 0, the minimization problem (1) is bounded
below and has a unique optimal point K ⋆ .
Proof We consider the case when λii = 0 as Banerjee
et al. (2006) already consider the case when λii > 0. First,
with probability 1, Σ̂ has non-zero diagonals because it was
generated from a set of data samples. If there is a dual
feasible point for (2), i.e., some W such that diag(W ) = 0
and |Wij | ≤ λij , the dual problem has a non-infinite value,
and so the primal is bounded below. Further, if we can
find a dual-feasible W such that |Wij | < λij (i.e. W is in
the relative interior of the domain), then Slater’s constraint
qualification (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004) guarantees a
primal-dual optimal pair K ⋆ = (Σ̂ + W ⋆ )−1 with zero
duality gap. So we simply show that a W in the relative
interior of the domain exists.
Consider the matrix D = diag(Σ̂) ≻ 0. For α ∈ [0, 1) we
have αΣ̂ + (1 − α)D ≻ 0. But, for any α, we have that
diag(αΣ̂ + (1 − α)D) = diag(Σ̂). Thus, we choose
W = αΣ̂ + (1 − α) diag(Σ̂) − Σ̂,

(3)

which has zeros on the diagonal, and for α close enough to
1 will have |Wij | < λij . Further,

starting point when the number of samples is less than the
dimension, which we do not.

Σ̂ + W = αΣ̂ + (1 − α) diag(Σ̂) ≻ 0.

We have already mentioned Meinshausen and Bühlmann’s
work (2006) regressing single variables against one another. The advantage of their approach is in its efficiency,
as solving n regressions each with n variables can be done
very quickly, i.e., in the time it takes to do one pass over all
the columns with LASSO. However, they do not directly
obtain a maximum likelihood estimate from their method,
only the structure of the graph.

Choosing W as in (3) gives a dual feasible point in the
relative interior of the domain. W ⋆ is unique by the strong
convexity of log det over the positive definite cone.
If we can find the maximizing W ⋆ for (2), we can also
easily calculate the sparsity for K ⋆ = (Σ̂ + W ⋆ )−1 by
the complementarity conditions on Wij and Kij (Boyd &
Vandenberghe, 2004). Specifically, if |Wij⋆ | < λij , then
⋆
Kij
= 0. Lastly, as shown in the analysis of the so-called
maximum determinant completion problem (see Boyd and
Vandenberghe (2004)), if we constrain only the diagonal
elements of W and do not constrain its off-diagonals, then
maximizing log det(Σ̂ + W ) will drive the off-diagonal entries of K to 0; as such, choosing λij = |Σ̂ij | forces complete sparsity in K and we find an MRF with no edges,
i.e., all the variables are independent. Thus, when solving
(1), we have a natural upper bound on λ beyond which no
additional sparsity can be gained.1
2.2 Prior Work
One recent approach for learning sparse GMRFs is to focus
on learning the set of neighbors for a particular variable by
regressing that variable against the remaining variables in
the network with an ℓ1 -penalty to promote sparsity (Meinshausen & Bühlmann, 2006). An alternative approach, first
presented by Banerjee et al. (2006), is to solve the optimization problem (2). It is convex and can be solved using
interior point methods in O(n6 log(1/ε)) time to a desired
accuracy ε, however, this becomes infeasible for even moderate n. Banerjee et al.’s approach was to solve problem (2)
iteratively, column by column, as a sequence of QPs. That
is, they define U = Σ̂ + W and partition U and Σ̂ as




U11 u12
S11 s12
U=
Σ̂
=
.
uT12 u22
sT12 s22
They then solve a sequence of box-constrained QPs (swapping rows of U to
all the rows), each iteration setting
 get −1
û12 = argminy y T U11
y | ky − s12 k ≤ λ , updating U
and W appropriately. This method takes O(T n4 ) time,
where T is the number of passes through the columns of
the matrix U .
An alternative to the box-constrained QP above (its dual) is
to minimize a sequence of re-weighted LASSO problems.
In work developed in parallel and independently of our paper, Friedman et al. (2007) use this to solve problem (2).
Their method enjoys better performance (around O(T n3 ),
though no analysis is given) than Banerjee et al.’s, which is
similar to the methods we develop in our paper. They, however, explicitly rely on λii being positive to get a feasible
1
Presumably one could regularize the diagonals further,
though this seems of little practical use.

The SPICE algorithm of Rothman et al. (2007) solves (1)
when λii = 0 (i.e., applying an ℓ1 -penalty only to off diagonal elements of the inverse covariance). The advantages
of this penalty are many: Rothman et al. prove that such a
setting of the regularization terms is consistent so that the
solution to (1) approaches the true inverse covariance as
the number of data samples increases, and they give experiments showing that not penalizing the diagonal consistently
learns model structure more accurately than does regularizing each entry of K. Further, Meinshausen (2005) gives
simple conditions under which penalizing the on-diagonal
entries of K in (1) gives the wrong inverse covariance, even
in the limit of infinite data. These results underscore the importance of Lemma 1, which gives a dual-feasible starting
point even when λii = 0. To our knowledge, this has not
been noted before this work.
The disadvantage of the SPICE algorithm is that, like
Banerjee et al.’s algorithm, it performs coordinate-wise
updates (though it uses the columns of the Cholesky decomposition of K). It repeatedly iterates through all the
columns, solving n O(n3 ) regressions at every step, giving
it a time complexity again of O(T n4 ). Further, Rothman
et al.’s algorithm has no explicit way to check convergence,
as it does not generate dual-feasible points (which our algorithms do), and they rely on truncation of near-zero values
rather than explicit conditions for sparsity in the inverse
covariance (such as complementarity of primal-dual variables). The algorithm they propose is also somewhat complicated.

3

Projected Gradient Method

We propose a projected gradient method for solving the
dual problem (2). Projected gradient algorithms minimize
an objective f (x) subject to the constraint that x ∈ S for
some convex set S.2 They do this by iteratively updating
x := ΠS (x + t∇f (x))
where t is a step size and ΠS (z) = argminy {kz−yk2 | y ∈
S} is the Euclidean projection onto set S (Bertsekas, 1976).
First order projected gradient algorithms are effective when
second order methods are infeasible because of the dimension of the problem. As the dimensions of our problems
2

In our case S is the set of n × n matrices in the box Bλ .

Algorithm 1 Maximize log det(Σ̂ + W ) subject to W ∈
Bλ = {W | |Wij | ≤ λij }. Given empirical covariance
Σ̂  0, λij , duality gap stopping criterion ǫ, and W such
that W ∈ Bλ , Σ̂ + W ≻ 0, and Wii = λii .
1: repeat
2:
Compute unconstrained gradient
3:
G := (Σ̂ + W )−1
4:
Zero components of gradient which would result in
constraint violation
5:
Gii := 0
6:
Gij := 0 for all Wij = λij and Gij > 0
7:
Gij := 0 for all Wij = −λij and Gij < 0
8:
Perform line search
9:
t :≈ argmaxt log det(Σ̂ + ΠBλ (W + tG))
10:
Update and project
11:
W := ΠBλ (W + tG)
12:
K := (Σ̂ + W )−1
13:
Compute duality gapP
14:
η = tr(Σ̂K) + ij λij |Kij | − n
15: until (η < ǫ) or maximum iterations exceeded
16: return K

Algorithm 2 Line search to find feasible t for log det(Σ̂ +
W + tG) given f0 = log det(Σ̂ + W ).
1: t :=

tr((Σ̂+W )−1 G)
−1 G(Σ̂+W )−1 G)
tr((Σ̂+W )



2: while log det Σ̂ + ΠBλ (W + tG) ≤ f0 do
3:
t := t/2
4: end while

often exceed n = 1000, giving more than 500,000 different parameters, this makes projected gradient methods a
reasonable choice.
The projected gradient method for our problem is shown
in Algorithm 1. The unconstrained gradient of the dual
objective function (2) is G = (Σ̂ + W )−1 . We perform
a line search to find the step size t that approximately
gives the greatest increase to the objective. This search
needs to guarantee that the estimated covariance Σ̂ + W
is positive definite, which it does because we assume that
log det X = −∞ for X 6≻ 0. We can guarantee that the
initial Σ̂ + W ≻ 0, because Σ̂  0, and we can simply
initialize Wii = λii and the rest of W via Lemma 1 (this
initialization is optimal for the diagonal elements, so we
do not modify them through the course of the algorithm).
The projection of the gradient appears in two places. First,
we immediately zero out some entries of the gradient when
Wij is at the boundary and Gij would push Wij outside
Bλ . Second, during the line search, in each step we project
the gradient onto the box-constraint |Wij | ≤ λij via the operation ΠBλ (W + tG), which simply sets any entry > λij
to λij (and likewise for −λij ).

For the simple box-constrained projections, because we
can immediately zero out many entries of the gradient G
and still have a descent direction (see lines 5 through 7
of Algorithm 1, which are not strictly necessary but improve the performance of the line search), a simple heuristic line search based on the second-order approximation to
log det performs very well. The second order expansion
of the log-determinant function around a point X (Boyd
& Vandenberghe, 2004) is given by log det(X + ∆X) ≈
log det(X) + tr(X −1 ∆X) − 21 tr(X −1 ∆XX −1 ∆X).
Thus, given the descent direction G, we approximate
log det(Σ̂ + W + tG) by
log det(Σ̂ + W ) + t tr((Σ̂ + W )−1 G)
− 21 t2 tr((Σ̂ + W )−1 G(Σ̂ + W )−1 G)
and perform the line search of Algorithm 2. Convergence
is guaranteed because the iterates for W form a sequence in
a compact space Bλ and log det(Σ̂+W ) is always increasing. If the line search cannot return a satisfying t, then no
improvement can be made in the projected descent direction, so standard arguments by KKT conditions for a differentiable convex function guarantee that we have reached
the optimum.

4

Structure Extensions

We can extend the basic problem of (1) to cases in which
we are interested in sparsity not just between single variables but between entire blocks of variables. In many
problem domains, variables can be naturally grouped into
blocks. For example, we might try to model a 2D shape
made up of articulated objects (such as the outline of an animal) in which we want to regularize interactions between
object parts (such as legs, body, head, and tail). Landmarks along the contour of an animal’s head can naturally
be grouped together, as these landmarks move collectively
as the animal moves through different articulated forms. In
modeling gene networks, we may want to encode the intuition that interactions happen at the level of pathways, i.e.,
either two pathways interact, in which case multiple genes
can be involved, or they do not interact at all. Block regularization might also arise in the context of learning multiresolution models constrained so that only variables within
specific resolution levels interact (Willsky, 2002).
In the block regularization case, we let the entries in our
inverse covariance matrix be divided into p < n2 disjoint
subsets S1 , . . . , Sp (the disjointness assumption is essential
to our method, as we see below). We can find the dependencies between the subsets by solving the following block
ℓ1 -regularized log likelihood problem:
minimize

− log det(K) + tr(Σ̂K)
(4)
X
+
λk max {|Kij | : (i, j) ∈ Sk } .
k

The subset Sk encodes a set of interactions that, as soon as
one of the interactions in the set exists, there is no reason

to penalize any of the other interactions. For example, in
the 2D shape model, the subsets Sk may be constructed as
Sqr = Bq × Br where the Bq and Br represent the set of
variables belonging to the q th and rth articulated body part,
respectively.
We can perform a similar derivation to the one in Section 2.1 to find the dual problem for (4):
maximize
subject to

log det(Σ̂ + W )
P

(i,j)∈Sk

|Wij | ≤ λk ,

(5)
for k = 1, . . . , p.

To apply a projected gradient
P method to (5), we need to
project to the constraints (i,j)∈Sk |Wij | ≤ λk . Recent
work by Duchi et al. (2008) provides such a method, giving
a randomized linear time algorithm to project a vector w to
the constraint kxk1 ≤ C. The sets Sk must be disjoint so
that we can project to each constraint in (5) independently
(and hence efficiently). We refer the reader to their paper
for a description of the actual projection algorithm.
Given the linear time algorithm to project to an ℓ1 constraint, we can develop an O(n2 ) expected time (the
same efficiency as the projection to Bλ of earlier methods) method to project to the feasible set S = {W |
P
(i,j)∈Sk |Wij | ≤ λk , k = 1, . . . , p}. The method simply iterates through each of the blocks
P Sk , projecting Wij :
(i, j) ∈ Sk to the constraint that (i,j)∈Sk |Wij | ≤ λk to
get W ∈ S. With this as a building block, Algorithm 3
maximizes the dual (5). Because the constraint set is more
complicated, making it difficult to make the second order
expansion of log det accurate for the projected direction,
the algorithm uses Armijo-like line searches as described
by Bertsekas (1976) rather than the simpler line search of
Algorithm 1. If we let g = ∇f (x), the Armijo line search
for a projected gradient maximization method with function f returns the first t such that
f (ΠS (x + tg)) ≥ f (x) + α∇f (x)T (ΠS (x + tg) − x)
where t is initialized to 1 and decreased by a multiplier
β < 1 every time the above condition is not satisfied. In
our algorithm t is adaptively chosen to make the line search
converge more quickly (see line 22 of Alg. 3), and setting
0 < α < 1 guarantees convergence of the method.
Previous methods developed for solving the penalized
maximum-likelihood problem for Gaussians are unable to
handle the block ℓ1 -penalties of (4). Effectively, batch steps
are needed to handle the more long range block constraints;
the coordinate based methods of Banerjee et al. (2006),
Friedman et al. (2007), and Rothman et al. (2007) cannot
account for more global constraints that tie parameters in
arbitrary columns and rows. Our projected gradient methods, however, extend to the case of block penalties, with
ease. Further, the added complexity is negligible, as the
entire projection step is still O(n2 ), while the expensive
O(n3 ) step is computing the gradient.

Algorithm 3 Solves (5) given an initial W such that Σ̂ +
W ≻ 0 and constants β and α, 0 < β < 1 and 0 < α < 1.
1: t = 1
2: repeat
3:
Compute unconstrained gradient
4:
G = (Σ̂ + W )−1
5:
Compute direction of step
6:
D = ΠS (W + tG) − W
7:
Compute initial and next objective values
8:
f0 = log det(Σ̂ + W )
9:
ft = log det(Σ̂ + ΠS (W + tG))
10:
Perform backtracking line search
11:
while ft < f0 + α tr(DG) do
12:
Decrease t, recalculate direction and objective
13:
t=β·t
14:
D = ΠS (W + tG) − W
15:
ft = log det(Σ̂ + ΠS (W + tG))
16:
end while
17:
Compute next points and duality gap
18:
W = ΠS (W + tG)
19:
K = (Σ̂ + W )−1
P
20:
η = tr(Σ̂K) + k λk kKij : (i, j) ∈ Sk k∞ − n
21:
Increase t slightly
22:
t = t/β
23: until η < ǫ

5

Experimental Results

In this section, we describe our experimental results. We
performed experiments both on synthetic and real data,
gathering timing information as well as calculating loglikelihood on test data, validating the usefulness of sparse
estimators. This validation seems to have been notably absent from much of the literature on sparse inverse covariance selection.
5.1

Timing Results

We ran a series of timing experiments for the original problem from equations (1) and (2) comparing our approach
to that of Banerjee et al. (2006) and Friedman et al.
(2007). To generate data for our timing experiments, we
constructed random n × n sparse inverse covariance matrices with roughly 20 edges per node. For each such matrix,
we generated n/3 samples and used them to construct the
empirical covariance Σ̂. We selected λ for the penalty in (1)
so that at solution, the inverse covariance K had (approximately) the correct number of edges. Our timing experiments were run on a computer with a 1.7Ghz Intel Xeon
32-bit processor and 1.96GB of RAM. The run times to
achieve a duality gap of ǫ = 0.1 are plotted in Fig. 1,
which shows CPU time versus problem size compared to
Banerjee et al.’s and Friedman et al.’s column-wise coordinate ascent algorithms. The results show that our projected
subgradient method outperforms Banerjee et al.’s columnwise ascent by one to two orders of magnitude on these

4

−60

2

10

1

10

Projected Subgradient
Iterated QP
Graphical Lasso

0

10
400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

Problem size

tests. Our method seems to find a solution in roughly half to
two-thirds the time that Friedman et al.’s does, though their
method seems to more easily be optimized when the primal matrix K becomes sparse. Further, in our experiments
when Σ̂ was not full rank, Friedman et al.’s method seemed
to have more difficulty maintaining a positive definite solution than did ours, which guarantees positive definiteness
of Σ̂+W throughout. We note that due to the slightly more
complicated projection, the run times of Alg. 3 are roughly
twice those of Alg. 1.
5.2

Synthetic Log Likelihoods

To test the impact of learning sparse structures, we compared our ℓ1 -penalized inverse covariance estimation from
(1) to Tikhonov regularized covariance matrices, i.e., selecting the covariance matrix to be Σ = Σ̂ + νI for some
ν > 0, which guarantees the positive-definiteness of Σ. To
do this, we randomly generated 20 inverse covariance matrices with 50% sparsity and dimension n = 60. From each
of these, we generated 30 samples for a training set (defining a covariance Σ̂) and 30 samples for a test set. We then
varied ν to compute the best test set log-likelihood achieved
by Tikhonov regularized covariance across all ν’s. Fig. 2(a)
shows this best-case test log-likelihood for the Tikhonov
regularized covariance versus the log-likelihood for sparse
covariances matrices output by Algorithm 1 as we sweep
the penalty parameter λ from max(|Σ̂ij |) to 10−3 . The
results show that, for appropriate levels of sparsity, ℓ1 regularized covariance estimation outperforms simple regularized estimates of the full covariance.
5.3

Mammal 2D Shape Models

Moving on to real data, we aimed to study whether our
block ℓ1 approach achieves better generalization than other
approaches for learning the model. In our first application,
we consider a two-dimensional shape classification task.
Here, we have a series of 60 landmarks, each an (x, y) point
in 2D, defining the outline of a mammal as a vector in R120 .
The mammals are from six classes: bison, deer, elephants,
giraffes, llamas, and rhinos. There are on average 42 examples from each class, each a hand-labeled outline from a
real image. Our task is to model each animal’s outline as a
Gaussian distribution, learning a mean µ(c) and covariance
Σ(c) for each of the six animal classes c.
We used and compared the standard sparsifying objective

−60
−65

Test log−likelihood

3

10

Figure 1:
Run
times in log-scale
of the method presented in this paper versus Banerjee et al.’s (Iterated
QP) and Friedman
et al.’s (Graphical
Lasso).

Test log−likelihood

CPU time (seconds)

10

−70

−75

−80

−85

−70
−80
−90
−100
−110
−120

Full
L1

−90

−95

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

% Non−zeros

(a)

Block L1
L1

−130
70

80

90

100

20

30

40

50

60

70

% Non−zeros

(b)

Figure 2: Log-likelihood results: (a) for synthetic data, comparing ℓ1 -penalized inverse covariance to (best-case) full covariance;
(b) for 2D shape-recognition test data, comparing the block versus
the non-block method.

(1) and the block-penalized objective (4) to learn sparse inverse covariances K (c) . For the block penalties, we manually chose the articulated body parts Bq as the head, neck,
stomach, each leg, back, and tail. The blocks Sk were then
Sk = Bq × Br for all pairs q and r (including q = r), and
the penalty λk for Sk was set so that λk ∝ |Sk |.3
We measure the performance of the competing methods in
two ways: by test set log-likelihood and by performance
on a classification task. In the log-likelihood case, we performed five-fold cross validation of the training data and
swept the λ penalties for both (1) and (4), ranging from
full-sparsity to no-sparsity solutions for the inverse covariance K. We set the mean µ(c) for each class simply as the
training set mean. As a baseline, we also chose a “full” covariance matrix Σ̂ + νI for each class using the Tikhonov
regularization technique described above. As above, we selected ν to give the best test log-likelihood for each class in
our cross-validation procedure. The block sparsity led to
moderate improvements in the test likelihood, which can
be seen in Fig. 2(b); we note that we do not plot the full
covariance result, as its best average log-likelihood on test
data is -173.22, which is off the bottom of the plot. We
see that ℓ1 -regularization significantly improves generalization, and that our block approach provides yet an additional improvement.
Other benefits of the block structured regularization can be
seen in a classification task. In this case, for each of the
three methods (sparse, block sparse, and Tikhonov regularized) and for each class we chose the inverse covariance
K (c) that maximized the Gaussian log-likelihood on a heldout validation set. The task is to classify examples from a
test set, that is, to assign a label ĉ to a given vector v ∈ R120
from the test set. We assign the label for v simply as the
class that has the maximum likelihood for v:
n
o
ĉ = argmax log det K (c) − (v − µ(c) )T K (c) (v − µ(c) ) .
c

The false positive and false negative error rates over ten
different testing runs for each class are in Table 1. We
3

Having the penalties on the blocks correspond to their sizes
overcomes the tendency for larger blocks to have edges since they
can more easily affect the log-likelihood.

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0

0

−20

−20

−40

−40

−60

−60

−530
−535

−100

−80

−60

−40

−20

0

20

40

60

80

average test log−likelihood

−540

−100

−80

−60

−40

−20

0

20

40

60

80

−545
−550
−555
−560
−565

Full Covariance

−570

L−1 (our method)
Block L−1 (our method)

−575
80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0

0

−20

−20

−40

−40

−60

−580
−4
10

−3

10

−2

λ

10

Figure 4:
Average
test
log-likelihood
on Gasch dataset for
ℓ1 (red diamonds)
and block ℓ1 (blue
circles) regularization
of inverse covariance
matrix, compared to
the
full-covariance
baseline (horizontal
green line).

metabolic pathways (Förster et al., 2003). We preprocess
the data so that each variable is zero mean and unit variance
across the dataset.

−60
−100

−80

−60

−40

−20

0

20

40

60

80

−100

−80

−60

−40

−20

0

20

40

60

80

Figure 3: Different sparsity structures learned on blocked llama
shape data.
Table 1: Classification Error Rates on Animals
N EG Bison Deer Elephant Giraffe Llama Rhino
ℓ1
5.6% 2.2%
1.3%
5.0% 40.0% 3.3%
Block 1.1%
0%
0%
3.0% 35.5% 3.3 %
2.5%
6.0% 41.1% 10.0%
Full 10.0% 1.1%
P OS Bison Deer Elephant Giraffe Llama Rhino
ℓ1
1.2% 35.3%
1.2%
0%
3.6%
0%
Block 1.1% 29.1%
1.2%
0%
0%
0%
Full
2.4% 40.3%
1.3%
0%
1.9%
0%

see that the standard ℓ1 -regularized objective almost always
outperforms the full inverse covariance, and that the block
ℓ1 -regularized likelihood consistently and significantly outperforms both other methods.
The block regularized covariance selection can also be visualized as in Fig. 3. In the figure, we display the sparsity (i.e. the edges in the associated MRF) of the block
inverse covariance learned for a llama outline as we vary
the penalty term. We can see that generally, the articulated
parts (legs, head, tail, body) have edges between themselves before edges between parts; intuitively, the relationships within articulated parts, such as the head or the legs,
capture the shape of the part and are likely to be more informative for density estimation of the shape distribution
than long range interactions such as the head’s position in
relation to the back right leg.
5.4

Gene Expression Data

We considered a data set that measures the mRNA expression levels of the 6152 genes in S. cerevisiae (baker’s
yeast), measured under various environmental stress conditions (Gasch et al., 2000). The expression level of the
genes can be modeled as random variables and each experiment as a data sample. Some of the expression data was
missing and we used a standard nearest-neighbor method to
impute the missing values (Troyanskaya et al., 2001). We
restricted the dataset to the 667 genes involved in known

For the block experiments we group genes into 86 disjoint sets Bq that correspond to known metabolic pathways (Förster et al., 2003).4 We then construct the edge
subsets as follows. We have one block Sqr for each pair
of pathways q 6= r, which contains all the covariance entries for Bq × Br . We then have a separate block Sij for
each pair of genes i, j in the same pathway. That is, we
apply block ℓ1 regularization between groups of genes in
different blocks and standard ℓ1 regularization between individual genes within the same block. For each block Sk
we again set λk = λ·|Sk | where λ is a shared regularization
parameter.
We conducted 5-fold cross-validation on the dataset. On
each fold we use the training set to estimate the covariance
matrix and compute the log-likelihood for each instance in
the test set. We report the average log-likelihood over the
5 folds. We baseline our method by first estimating the
full covariance matrix. Since the number of data samples
(174) is significantly smaller than the number of variables
(667), we again use cross-validated Tikhonov regularization as previously described to give an estimate for Σ. We
compare our results against the best (highest log-likelihood
on test) Tikhonov regularized covariance.
Fig. 4 shows the performance of our methods compared to
the baseline. The results clearly illustrate that the sparsity
inducing ℓ1 -regularized objective outperforms the baseline,
while the block ℓ1 -regularized penalties give further benefits in terms of log-likelihood.

6

Conclusion

In this work, we have presented new methods for finding
sparse inverse covariance matrices and thereby for selecting edge structures for Gaussian MRFs. The methods we
present are significantly faster than prior work, and they
generalize straightforwardly to learning more complicated
structures than has been previously possible. We also provide compelling experimental results on two real-world
4
A small number of genes that participate in more than one
pathway were placed into individual sets of 1 gene each.

data sets demonstrating the benefits of this approach for
both density estimation and classification.

Dempster, A. P. (1972). Covariance selection. Biometrics, 28,
157–175.

Our work suggests the promise of projected gradient methods for other ℓ1 -regularized problems by optimization in
the dual space, as the duals of these problems often have
simple ℓ∞ constraints to which it is trivial to project. However, this approach currently relies on the ability to efficiently recover the primal variables from the dual variables,
making its general application an open problem. Another
interesting direction for future work is the construction of
methods for intelligently setting the penalty parameters λ.
This could certainly lead to more accurate structure recoveries, and recent work by Do et al. (2007) demonstrates the
promise of hyperparameter learning in log-linear models;
this might be extended to more general problems such as
structure learning. Our work demonstrates the benefit of
block-structured regularization. However, the blocks must
currently be selected by hand and cannot overlap. Automatically learning the block structure would be a very
useful extension to our work, both for improved performance and for the explanatory power it gives beyond individual edge structures. Finally, ℓ1 -regularized learning
has recently been demonstrated successfully for discrete
MRFs (Lee et al., 2006; Wainwright et al., 2007). It
would be interesting to see whether efficient projectionbased methods such as ours can be applied to richer settings
that involve discrete variables or non-linear continuous interactions.

Do, C. B., Foo, C.-S., & Ng, A. Y. (2007). Efficient multiple
hyperparameter learning for log-linear models. Neural Information Processing Systems 21.

Acknowledgments

Dobra, A., Hans, C., Jones, B., Nevins, J., Yao, G., & West, M.
(2004). Sparse graphical models for exploring gene expression
data. Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 90, 196–212.
Duchi, J., Shalev-Shwartz, S., Singer, Y., & Chandra, T. (2008).
Efficient projections onto the ℓ1 -ball for learning in high dimensions. Proceedings of the 25th International Conference
on Machine Learning.
Förster, J., Famili, I., Fu, P., & Palsson, B. O. (2003). Genomescale reconstruction of the saccharomyces cerevisiae metabolic
network. Genome Research, 13, 244–253.
Friedman, J., Hastie, T., & Tibshirani, R. (2007). Sparse inverse
covariance estimation with the graphical lasso. Biostatics, 1–
10.
Gasch, A., Spellman, P., Kao, C., Carmel-Harel, O., Eisen, M.,
Storz, G., Botstein, D., & Brown, P. (2000). Genomic expression program in the response of yeast cells to environmental
changes. Molecular Biology of the Cell, 11, 4241–4257.
Lauritzen, S. L. (1996). Graphical models. Clarendon Press.
Lee, S.-I., Ganapathi, V., & Koller, D. (2006). Efficient structure
learning of Markov networks using ℓ1 -regularization. Neural
Information Processing Systems.
Levitin, E. S., & Polyak, B. T. (1966). Constrained minimization problems. USSR Computational Math and Mathematical
Physics, 6, 1–50.

We thank Stephen Boyd for his guidance and useful comments, Gal Elidan and Geremy Heitz for help with the
mammals data set, Gal Chechik and Su-In Lee for help with
the gene expression data set, and the anonymous reviewers for helpful feedback. This work was supported by the
Office of Naval Research under MURI N000140710747,
DARPA under the Transfer Learning program, and NSF
grant BDI-0345474.

Malioutov, D. M., Johnson, J. K., & Willsky, A. S. (2006). Walksums and belief propagation in gaussian graphical models.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7, 2031–2064.

References

Rothman, A., Bickel, P., Levina, E., & Zhu, J. (2007). Sparse
permutation invariant covariance estimation (Technical Report 467). University of Michian Dept. of Statistics.

Banerjee, O., Ghaoui, L. E., d’Aspremont, A., & Natsoulis, G.
(2006). Convex optimization techniques for fitting sparse gaussian graphical models. Proceedings of the 23rd International
Conference on Machine Learning.
Bar-Shalom, Y., & Fortmann, T. E. (1988). Tracking and data
association. Academic Press.
Bertsekas, D. P. (1976). On the Goldstein-Levitin-Polyak gradient
projection method. IEEE Trans. on Automatic Control, 21.
Bilmes, J. A. (2000). Factored sparse inverse covariance matrices.
IEEE Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing.
Boyd, S., & Vandenberghe, L. (2004). Convex optimization. Cambridge University Press.

Meinshausen, N. (2005).
A note on the lasso for
Gaussian graphical model selection.
Available at
http://www.stats.ox.ac.uk/ meinshau/note.pdf.
Meinshausen, N., & Bühlmann, P. (2006). High dimensional
graphs and variable selection with the lasso. Annals of Statistics, 34, 1436–1462.

Tibshirani, R. (1996). Regression shrinkage and selection via the
lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society B, 58, 267–288.
Troyanskaya, O., Cantor, M., Sherlock, G., Brown, P., Hastie,
T., Tibshirani, R., Botstein, D., & Altman, R. (2001). Missing value estimation for DNA microarrays. Bioinformatics, 17,
520–525.
Wainwright, M. J., Ravikumar, P., & Lafferty, J. D. (2007). Highdimensional graphical model selection using ℓ1 -regularized logistic regression. Neural Information Processing Systems 19.
Willsky, A. (2002). Multiresolution markov models for signal and
image processing. Proceedings of IEEE, 90, 1396–1548.

