MAXQ [Dietterich, 2000] approximates Q(ω, u) as a sum
of Qr (ω, u), the expected sum of rewards obtained while
u is executing, and Qc (ω, u), the expected sum of rewards
after u until the current subroutine completes. 1 The ALisp decomposition [Andre and Russell, 2002] includes a
third term, Qe (ω, u), to cover rewards obtained after the
subroutine exits. These two decompositions lead to two
different notions of optimal completion. MAXQ yields recursive optimality—i.e., the policy within each subroutine
is optimized ignoring the calling context. ALisp yields hierarchical optimality—i.e., optimality among all policies
consistent with the partial program.
Recursively optimal policies may be worse than hierarchically optimal ones if context is relevant, because they
ignore the exit values Qe . On the other hand, ALisp may
need more samples to learn Qe accurately. It can also be
argued that, whereas Qr and Qc represent sums of rewards
that are local to a given subroutine, and hence likely to be
well approximated by a low-dimensional function, Qe represents a non-local sum of rewards and may, therefore, be
very difficult to learn. Thus, we seem to have a dilemma:
ignore Qe and risk seriously suboptimal behavior, or include Qe and incur a potentially high learning cost.
This paper shows that, in many cases, one can avoid
both of these problems. The solution, described in Section 4, is based on recursively decomposing the exit value
1
MAXQ also allows a “pseudoreward” function for exit values, but this must be specified in advance by the programmer.

function in terms of Q-functions at higher levels of the hierarchy. New algorithms for learning and execution based
on this decomposition are presented. In Section 5, we show
how the idea of additive irrelevance can be used to dramatically further simplify the representation based on conditional independencies that may hold in the domain. Finally,
in Section 6, we describe a more general simplification that
depends on the size of the “interface” between a subroutine
and its context. The utility of each successive decomposition is demonstrated experimentally.

2 Main example
In this section, we describe our main illustrative example.
We begin with a very simple version of the environment,
which will be made more complex over the course of the
paper, as we introduce the various components of our approach. We use Markov decision processes as our modelling framework, and further assume that the state is represented as an instantiation to a set V of state variables.
The example is based on one from [Dietterich, 2000].
Example 1. The taxi MDP models a taxi moving around
and serving passengers on a grid. States in the MDP consist of the taxi’s position and a set of passengers, each
having a source, destination, generosity level, and status
(at-source or in-taxi). The actions available to the
taxi are: moves in the four cardinal directions, which may
fail with some probability; pickup, which picks up the
passenger at the taxi’s current position, assuming the taxi
doesn’t already have a passenger; and dropoff, which
drops off the passenger who is currently in the taxi, assuming the taxi is at her destination. Upon a successful
dropoff action, with some probability the episode terminates, and otherwise, the set of passengers is reset 2 using some distribution over each passenger’s source, destination, and generosity (but the taxi stays at its current position). A fixed cost is charged per time step, and a reward,
which depends only on the passenger’s generosity, is given
after a successful dropoff.
Even for this simple domain, the optimal policy is not
completely clear. For example, deciding on a passenger
requires trading off the time and the expected reward for
serving this passenger against how centrally placed the taxi
will be after serving the passenger.

3 Alisp and hierarchical RL
ALisp is a language for specifying constraints on policies
using “partial programs”. We provide a brief overview of
ALisp here. A more complete description can be found in
the literature [Andre and Russell, 2002; Andre, 2003].
Figure 1 shows an example ALisp (partial) program
for the environment in Example 1. The top-level func2

Assuming the passenger set is only reset after a dropoff is like
assuming the taxi only communicates with the central dispatcher
after serving the current passenger.

(defun taxi-main ()
(loop until (at-terminal-state) do
(call SP serve)))
(defun serve ()
(call GP get-pass
(choose-arg (waiting-passengers)))
(call PP put-pass (pass-being-served))
(defun get-pass (p)
(call NS nav (pass-src p))
(action PA ’pickup))
(defun put-pass (p)
(call ND nav (pass-dest p))
(action DA ’dropoff))
(defun nav (loc)
(loop until (equal loc (taxi-pos))
do (with-choice NC (d ’(N S E W))
(action NM d))))

Figure 1: ALisp program for basic taxi domain. ALispspecific statements are in bold. The second argument
to call, with-choice, and action statements is
just a label. The functions waiting-passengers,
pass-being-served, pass-src, pass-dest,
and taxi-pos are not shown here; they simply extract the
required components from the environment state (which is
obtained using the ALisp command get-state).

tion taxi-main says that the taxi must repeatedly serve
a passenger until the episode terminates. Serving a passenger consists of choosing the passenger, then doing a
get-pass followed by a put-pass. The get-pass
subroutine consists of navigating to the passenger’s source,
and doing a pickup action in the environment. Similarly, put-pass consists of navigating to the passenger’s
destination and doing a dropoff. The nav subroutine
involves repeatedly choosing a direction to move in until
the goal is reached. The choices of which passenger to
serve and which directions to move in while navigating are
not specified by the program, but are left open using the
with-choice command. This means that the learning
algorithm has to learn a completion that specifies how to
make these choices optimally as a function of state.
Consider a partial program being executed in an environment. At any point, let s denote the state of the environment, and θ denote the machine state, i.e., the program counter, memory, and runtime stack. Define the
joint state ω = (s, θ). Let Ω be the set of joint states in
which the program counter is at a choice (with-choice
or choose-arg) statement. Formally, a completion is a
function π on Ω such that π(ω) ranges over the choices
available at ω. A basic theorem of hierarchical RL [Parr
and Russell, 1997; Precup and Sutton, 1998; Dietterich,
2000] states that given an MDP and partial program, there

is an equivalent SMDP such that completions of the partial
program correspond to policies for the SMDP. In the rest
of this paper, we speak of policies and completions interchangeably.
As in the MDP case, we can define the value function
V π (ω) as the expected total reward gained in the environment if we start at ω and continue the partial program, making choices using π. We are interested in finding the hierarchically optimal π, which must satisfy ∀ω, π 0 V π (ω) ≥
0
V π (ω). Define Qπ (ω, u) to be the expected total reward
gained if we begin by making choice u in ω, then continue
the partial program, making choices using π.3 In this paper,
we always work with undiscounted value and Q-functions,
and further restrict attention to completions that eventually
terminate with probability 1.
One of the virtues of hierarchical RL is that the structure in the partial program yields an additive decomposition of the Q-function. Consider the navigation choice at
ω N C in the trajectory shown in Figure 2. Q(ω N C , u) is
the expected reward over all future trajectories. This can
be written as Qr (ω N C , u) + Qc (ω N C , u) + Qe (ω N C , u),
where Qr is the expected reward while doing u, Qc is the
expected reward after u, but before exiting the current subroutine, and Qe is the expected reward gained after exiting
the subroutine. The motivation is that each of these components might be amenable to state abstraction. At ω N C , Qr
is the reward for moving one step, which is constant, while
Qc is the reward until reaching the current goal, which only
depends on the taxi’s position and destination. Neither of
these components depends, say, on the passenger’s destination [Dietterich, 2000].
There exist algorithms for learning Q and for learning the three components separately [Andre and Russell,
2002]. Note that the behaviour of the runtime agent given
a learnt Q-function is conceptually simple—at a state ω,
pick u to maximize Q(ω, u) (in the decomposed case, just
add the components together).
A problem with the 3-part decomposition is that the
Qe component will often depend on many variables. The
Qr and Qc components are local, i.e., they refer to the total
rewards gained within some subroutine, whereas Qe measures all future rewards received after the current subroutine. At the navigation choice in the previous example, Qe
includes the rewards gained while dropping off the current
passenger and serving all future passengers. As we scale up
to domains with huge numbers of variables, Qe will typically depend on most of them. Thus the number of parameters to learn will scale exponentially with the number
of state variables. Our goal is to avoid having to represent
and learn Qe , yet preserve the possibility of hierarchically
optimal behaviour.

3
In future, we will often leave out the π superscript when it is
obvious from context.

4 Recursive Q-function decomposition
We begin by expressing Qe in terms of Qr and Qc functions at higher levels of the hierarchy. Given a subroutine
σ, and a state ω and choice u occurring in the call stack at
or below σ, write Peπ,σ (ω 0 |ω, u) for the probability of exiting σ at state ω 0 given that we choose u at ω, then follow
π. We also write Peπ,σ (ω 0 |ω) to mean Peπ,σ (ω 0 |ω, π(ω)). In
the special case where ω occurs in σ itself, we will leave out
the σ superscript, and refer to this conditional distribution
as the exit distribution of σ. Write Vrπ (ω) = Qπr (ω, π(ω))
and similarly for Vc and Ve (as with Q, we will often omit
the π superscript of V and Pe ). Then,
Qe (ω N C , u) = EPe (ωP A |ωN C ,u) [V (ω P A )]
= EPe (ωP A |ωN C ,u) [Vr (ω P A ) + Vc (ω P A ) +
Ve (ω P A )]
= EPe (ωP A |ωN C ,u) [Vr (ω P A ) + Vc (ω P A ) +
EPe (ωP P |ωP A ) [V (ω P P )]]
= EPe (ωP A |ωN C ,u) [Vr (ω P A ) + Vc (ω P A ) +
EPe (ωP P |ωP A ) [Vr (ω P P ) + Vc (ω P P ) +
EPe (ωSP |ωP P ) [Vr (ω SP ) + Vc (ω SP )]]]
This derivation mirrors the structure of the program
in Figure 2. Note that the figure depicts one possible trajectory of the program; other trajectories may have different call structures. Nevertheless, all trajectories passing
through ω N C will contain (random) exit states ω P A , ω P P ,
and ω SP , and those are the only states referred to.4 The
following theorem generalizes the derivation.
Theorem 1. Let ω be a joint state of an ALisp program
with stack (σn , . . . , σ0 ). Given a choice u at ω and a completion π, define random variables ω 1 , . . . , ω n , where ω i is
the exit state of σi that is reached after choosing u at ω and
following π thereafter. Then,
Qe (ω, u) =
=

EPe (ωn |ω,u) [Vr (ω n ) + Vc (ω n ) + Ve (ω n )]
EPe (ωn |ω,u) [Vr (ω n ) + Vc (ω n ) +
EPe (ωn−1 |ωn ) [Vr (ω n−1 ) + Vc (ω n−1 ) +
. . . + EPe (ω1 |ω2 ) [Vr (ω 1 ) + Vc (ω 1 )]

Since Vr and Vc can be computed from Qr and Qc ,
this theorem shows that knowledge of Qr , Qc , and the exit
distributions is enough to act optimally.
It might seem like we have exchanged one problem
for another, since instead of Qe , we now have to learn exit
probability distributions Pe . But in fact, the individual exit
distributions often have a lot of structure, such as determinism and conditional or context-sensitive independencies,
which might be known beforehand. For example, at the
4
We are making use of the guaranteed termination of legal ALisp programs.

ω0

SERVE

SERVE

ωGP

ωSP
GET-PASS

ωNS

ωPP

NAV

…

PUT-PASS

…

ωPA
PICKUP
ωNC

…

Figure 2: An execution trajectory of the partial program in Example 1. The circles represent successive joint states. The
vertical position of a circle depends on the depth of the stack of choices/calls at that state. With the exception of the leftmost
state ω 0 , which is at the call statement in taxi-main, the circles are labelled with label at the corresponding choice or
action statement. For example, ω GP is a joint state where the program counter points to the choice statement with label
GP.
navigation choice ω N C in Figure 2, Pe (ω P A |ω N C ) deterministically leads to the state where the taxi is at the passenger location, and Pe (ω P P |ω P A ) deterministically leads
to the state where the passenger is now in the taxi. Also,
Pe (ω SP |ω P P ) either results in termination, or keeps the
taxi at its current location and reinitializes each passenger
independently, and so the only quantities that need to be
estimated are the termination probability and the distribution over an individual passenger’s source, destination, and
generosity.
4.1 Computing Qe at runtime
Algorithm 1 Functions for computing Qe at runtime. Initialize is called by the overall ALisp interpreter when starting to run the program. CallSub is called when a subroutine
is called. QStack is a global stack maintained by the interpreter. The stack is popped when leaving a subroutine.
Decisions are made by maximizing the Q-function at the
top of the stack. The operations Expectation, Add,
and GetValueFn are assumed provided as blackboxes.
function I NITIALIZE
Q ← Qr + Qc of top level
P USH(Q, QStack)
end function
function C ALL S UB(σ)
Qpar ← T OP(QStack)
Ve ← G ET VALUE F N(Qpar )
Qe ← E XPECTATION(Ve , Pe , σ)
Q ← A DD(Qr , Qc , Qe )
P USH(Q, QStack)
end function

Given Qr , Qc and Pe , we need to compute Q from
them to act optimally at runtime. The recursive nature of
Theorem 1 suggests that the entire computation need not

be repeated for each state, but can happen whenever a call
is made, as shown in Algorithm 1.
The algorithm maintains a stack of Q-functions parallel to the call stack. Of course, there is really only one
Q-function, but the point is that the Q-function on the stack
for a particular subroutine can be a compact representation that is valid only for states encountered in that subroutine. Moreover, the operations within the algorithm, such
as Expectation, can operate directly on these representations. For example, we might use decision trees for Qfunctions, DBNs for the exit distributions, and the methods
of [Boutilier et al., 1999] to operate on them efficiently.
When calling a subroutine, the exit value function for
that subroutine is computed using the parent’s Q-function.
This is then combined with the child’s exit distribution to
get a representation of the Q-function for the child, which
is added to the stack. Decisions within the subroutine are
made by maximizing this Q-function. An intuitive description of the overall procedure is that each subroutine “passes
in” its exit value function to children, who compute their
Q-function from it.
4.2 A learning algorithm for Pe
Prior work [Andre and Russell, 2002] has described the
HORDQ algorithm, which learns Qr , Qc , and Qe based on
samples from a GLIE policy. Now Pe satisfies the Bellman
equation
X
Peπ (ω̃|ω, u) = P (ω̃|ω, u) +
P (ω 0 |ω, u)Peπ (ω̃|ω 0 , π)
ω 0 ∈SS

where P (·|ω, u) is the distribution over the next choice
state at the same level as ω encountered after choosing u in
ω, and SS(ω) is the set of choice states in the same subroutine as ω. We can therefore modify the original HORDQ algorithm to a Hierarchically Optimal Cascaded Q-Learning

2

Av Reward of learnt policy

0

−2

−4

−6

−8
0

RORDQ
HORDQ
HOCQ
50

100

150

200

250

Num samples (x 1000)

Figure 3: Learning curves for RORDQ, HORDQ, and
HOCQ in Example 1, in a 6 by 6 world with two passengers (15552 states). No state abstraction was used for Qe
or Pe . All curves averaged over 10 runs.
algorithm (HOCQ) that learns Pe instead of Qe . Every time
we encounter successive states at the same level ω and ω 0
(with possibly some intervening states at lower levels), we
set the new value of the conditional distribution Pe (ω̃|ω, u)
to
(1 − η)Pe (ω̃|ω, u) + ηP (ω 0 |ω, u)Pe (ω̃|ω 0 , π(ω 0 ))
where η is a learning rate parameter. When we encounter a
state ω that is followed by a state ω 0 at the parent level, we
set Pe (ω̃|ω, u) to
(1 − η)Pe (ω̃|ω, u) + ηδω0 (ω̃)
Figure 3 compares the performance of HOCQ with
HORDQ and its recursively optimal counterpart RORDQ
on Example 1. Somewhat surprisingly, even without state
abstraction of Qe or Pe , HOCQ has a slight edge over
HORDQ. Note also that RORDQ converges to a slightly
suboptimal policy (essentially, it is too willing to serve generous passengers travelling to remote locations).

5 Additive irrelevance
The previous section showed how to replace Qe with the
more “local” quantity Pe , but we are still not making full
use of this locality. Pe describes the exit distribution of
all the state variables, even those that have no connection
with what is going on in the subroutine. This seems unnecessary. For example, a stock-owning taxi driver shouldn’t
have to condition her low-level navigation decisions on unrelated variables such as the current state of the NASDAQ
exchange, even if this variable does affect the exit value. In
this section, we formalize such intuitions. We begin with
an obvious but useful fact.
Lemma 1. (Additive Irrelevance) If Q(ω, u) = Q1 (ω, u)+
Q2 (ω), then ∀ω arg maxu Q(ω, u) = arg maxu Q1 (ω, u).
A consequence of this fact [Andre, 2003] is that if the
exit distribution of the current subroutine at a state ω is

unique, i.e., it does not depend on the choice made at ω,
then arg maxu Q(ω, u) = arg maxu Qr (ω, u) + Qc (ω, u).
This condition applies at the navigation choice, since given
any joint state ω arising in the nav subroutine, there is only
one possible exit state, namely the one in which the taxi is
at its navigation goal, and all other variables are unchanged.
Thus, there is no need to even compute Qe at this state. On
the other hand, the condition does not hold at the passenger
choice ω GP , since the choice of passenger affects the taxi
position after the dropoff.
In practice, the unique exit condition will rarely hold.
Even at the navigation choice, adding a fuel variable would
destroy it, since the navigation choices would affect the
amount of fuel when exiting. We thus look for a more general way to apply Lemma 1. Here is a motivating example.
Example 2. Consider modifying Example 1 by adding a
high-dimensional variable ωg that represents the state of
all traffic on the roads. ωg evolves according to a transition distribution P (ωg0 |ωg ), independently of the rest of the
state, each time a passenger is served. Further, whenever
some statistic of ωg exceeds a threshold, a constant toll is
charged per passenger (after a successful dropoff).
Since the unique exit condition does not hold at ω GP ,
it would seem that we must learn Pe (ω SP |ω GP , u), which
includes the exit distribution of g. Note, however, that u
does not actually affect the exit distribution of g. Also, a
bit of thought shows that the exit value function can be deSP
composed as V (ω SP ) = V1 (ωx,y,pass
) + V2 (ωgSP ), where
pass is the source, destination and generosity of all the
passengers, V2 consists of the expected future tolls, and V1
includes all the other rewards. Since V2 only depends on
g, its contribution to Qe will be constant with respect to u,
and may therefore be ignored. So we just need to compute
the expected exit value of V1 , which only requires knowing
SP
Pe (ωx,y,pass
|ω GP ). This argument can be generalized.
Definition 1. Given a transition distribution P (ω 0 |ω, u),
we say that a set of variables D is decoupled from the
0
is conditionally inchoice at ω with respect to P if ωD
dependent of u given ω under the distribution P .5 We call
a variable (or set) of variables coupled if it is not a member
(or subset) of any decoupled set.
We will typically take P to be the exit distribution. In
Example 2, {g} is decoupled from the choice at ω GP with
respect to Pe . To incorporate additive irrelevance into the
recursive decomposition, we need a definition that applies
to entire subroutines.
Definition 2. A set of variables D is decoupled from subroutine σ if, for any ω occurring in σ or its descendants,
and any completion π within σ, D is decoupled from the
choice at ω with respect to Peπ .
Definition 3. A triple (D, R, V1 ) satisfies the factored exit
condition with respect to a subroutine σ and function V if
5
Strictly speaking, u is not a random variable, so this just
0
means that P (ωD
|ω, u) is the same for each u.

ω’D\R
ω’D

V-V1

R

V1
ω’R\D

u

ω’V 

Figure 4: The factored exit condition. This condition must
hold all states occurring in a subroutine σ and its descendants, with respect to the exit distribution Peσ of σ. V is the
set of all variables.
D is decoupled from σ and, for every exit state ω 0 of σ,
0
0
V (ω 0 ) − V1 (ωR
) only depends on ωD
.
Figure 4 illustrates this condition. We call V1 the reduced value function and R the set of its relevant variables. For the passenger choice in Example 2, we can satisfy this condition using decoupled variables {g}, relevant
variables {x,y, pass}, and the reduced value function
that doesn’t include tolls.
Theorem 2. Suppose (D, R, V1 ) satisfies the factored exit
condition with respect to σ. Let ω be a joint state with
stack (σ0 , . . . , σm−1 , σ, σm+1 , . . . , σn ). Let the random
variables ω 1 , . . . , ω n denote the exit states of these subroutines. Then,
Qe (ω, u) =

EPe (·|ω,u) [Vr (ω n ) + Vc (ω n ) +
EPe (·|ωn ) [Vr (ω n−1 ) + Vc (ω n−1 ) +
m
. . . + EPe (·|ωm+1 ) [V1 (ωR
)]]] + f (ω)

where f does not depend on u. In particular, optimal decisions can be made by maximizing Qe − f .
This theorem justifies a modification to Algorithm 1
in which each subroutine passes a reduced value function
to its child. Algorithm 2 makes this precise. In addition to
Qr , Qc , and Pe , the algorithm takes as input, for each subroutine, sets D and R, and a blackbox function Reduce
that takes in a representation of an exit value function V
and produces V1 such that (D, R, V1 ) is a factored exit
triple for V . Such a blackbox function is often easy to write
if we have a structured representation of V . If we do not
have this information for a subroutine, we can set R to V,
D to the empty set, and Reduce to the identity function.
Thus, using the factored exit condition will speed
things up at runtime, since we only compute expectations
of the reduced exit value function. There will also be
an improvement during learning; we now only need to
learn the exit distributions of the relevant variables for
each subroutine, and can also make use of the factorization

Algorithm 2 Modification to Algorithm 1 that takes factored exit conditions into account.
function C ALL S UB(σ)
Qpar ← T OP(QStack)
Ve ← G ET VALUE F N(Q)
V¯e ← R EDUCE(Ve )
Qe ← E XPECTATION(V¯e , Pe , σ)
Q ← A DD (Qr , Qc , Qe )
P USH(Q, QStack)
end function
−2
−4
Avg reward of learnt policy

ω

−6
−8
−10
−12
−14
HOCQ
HOCQ + Factored Exit Dist

−16
−18
0

100

200

300

400

500

Num samples (x 1000)

Figure 5: Learning curves for HOCQ with and without factored exit condition in Example 2, averaged over 10 runs.
0
0
0
|ω, u). It is straightP (ωR
|ω, u) = P (ωR∩D
|ω)P (ωR\D
forward to extend the basic HOCQ algorithm of Section 4.2
to take these facts into account. The extent of the gains will
depend on the number of relevant variables and their domain size, and on how many variables in the current state
affect the exit values of the relevant variables.
In Figure 5, we measure the effect of using the factored exit condition in Example 2. The traffic variable takes
10 different values. The per-dropoff transition matrix for
traffic and the toll vector were chosen randomly at the start
of the experiment. Without the factored exit condition, the
algorithm learns to navigate as before, but has difficulty reliably learning to choose passengers optimally. When factored exit distributions are taken into account, the algorithm
learns as quickly as in Figure 3.

6 Separating a subroutine from its context
In some cases, the factored exit condition does not simplify the problem much. One family of such cases occurs
when choices made in a subroutine affect the number of
time steps that elapse before exiting the subroutine, which
in turn affects the exit value of most of the state variables.
Example 3. Consider the environment of Example 2, modified so that the traffic variable evolves once per timestep,
rather than only when a passenger is dropped off. For convenience, we also add the state variable t, which equals the
current timestep.

ω

ω’W

u

ω’S

V

Figure 6: In this picture, S is a separator for W . The dashed
box surrounds that part of the distribution that is used at
runtime by the subroutine containing ω to compute the expected value of Ṽ . The part outside the box is used by the
parent to compute Ṽ .
Suppose we are at the passenger choice in Example 3
and choosing between two passengers, such that one of
them will take longer to serve, but is more generous. Since
the traffic evolves once per timestep, its exit value is coupled with the choice of passenger, and there is no useful
application of Theorem 2.
The second type of example that causes problems is
when events occurring within a subroutine can change the
state in a way that affects all future rewards.
Example 4. Consider the environment of Example 2, modified so that some map squares are designated as “cliffs”.
Moving onto one of these squares results in a large negative reward and immediate termination of the episode. For
correctness, the partial program is also modified to terminate when at a cliff.
Suppose we are at the passenger choice of Example 4.
Let c be a Boolean variable that is true if the taxi has moved
on to a cliff square. Then, assuming moves are noisy, c is
coupled with our choice of passenger; for example, picking up a passenger in a region of the map with many cliff
squares would carry a high risk of accidentally entering one
of them. But it is no longer possible to find a nontrivial additive decomposition of the exit value function in which
one of the components does not depend on c. Intuitively,
when deciding between a stingy passenger in the plains,
and a generous one in the mountains, the optimal decision
depends on how much future expected reward is being lost
in the second case due to the possibility of falling off a cliff.
So we cannot ignore any portion of the exit value function.
A commonality between the last two examples is the
existence of a small set of variables that makes the exit values of all the variables relevant to Qe , either by making
them all coupled with the current choice, as with t (the
current timestep) in the first example, or by jointly participating with them in some value function component as with
c in the second case. We can formalize this idea.
Definition 4. Given P (ω 0 |ω, u), and sets of variables S
0
and W , we say that S is a separator for W if ωW
is condi0
tionally independent of u given ω and ωS .
Figure 6 illustrates this condition. At the passen-

ger choice in Example 3, {t, x,y} is a separator for
{g,pass}. At the passenger choice in Example 4,
{c, x,y} is a separator for {c, pass, x,y}. As
shown in this example, it is possible for S and W to overlap.
Let’s look a bit more closely at Example 3. Imagine that the subroutines are separate entities, and each subroutine “knows” only about the direct effects of its actions
on local rewards and on exit values of some subset of the
variables. Thus the serve subroutine only knows how its
choice of passenger affects rewards within the subroutine
and the exit distribution of {t, x,y}. Given this knowledge, what additional information is needed to make optimal decisions at ω GP ? The answer is that we need to know
the “projection” of the exit value function onto the variables
in the separator set {t, x,y}:
def

SP
SP
ṼωGP (ωt,x,y
) = EPe [V (ω SP )|ω GP , ωt,x,y
]

where the right hand side makes sense independently of u
because V (ω SP ) depends only on the variables in W , and
t, x,y is a separator for W . Knowing Ṽ is sufficient, for
then we can compute
SP
Qe (ω GP , u) = EPe [ṼωGP (ωt,x,y
)|ω GP , u]

using the known distribution Pe (ωtSP |ω GP , u). Intuitively,
the parent computes and “passes in” Ṽ to the child, who
uses it, together with Pe of the separator variables, to compute Q, as shown in Figure 6. In general,
Definition 5. Suppose S is a separator for W at ω. Let
f (ω 0 ) be any function on exit states ω 0 that only depends
0
. The projection of f onto S is defined as
on ωS∪W
0
0 |ω,ω 0 ) [f (ω
f˜ω (ωS0 ) = EP (ωW
W,S )]
S

Lemma 2. Suppose S is a separator for W at ω, and that
the (possibly reduced) exit value function V (ω 0 ) depends
only on the variables W ∪ S . Then
Qe (ω, u) = EPe (ωS0 |ω,u) [Ṽω (ωS0 )]
In light of Lemma 2, we can modify Algorithm 2
to take separators into account, as shown in Algorithm 3.
The algorithm takes, as an additional input, sets S and W
for each pair of subroutines σ1 , σ2 where σ1 can call σ2 ,
such that S is a separator for W within σ2 and the exit
value function of σ2 only depends on S ∪ W . The learning algorithm must also be modified to separately learn
0
P (ωW
|ω, ωS0 ) and Peπ (ωS0 |ω, u).
What have we gained by this decomposition? The first
component is a kind of “general knowledge”, which will
often be unaffected by aspects of ω that pertain to the details of the particular task being done, and can thus be learnt
using samples from many different tasks. At the passenger
choice in Example 3, this component equals P (ωg0 |ωg , ωt0 ),
the distribution of how traffic evolves over time, while in

Algorithm 3 Modification to Algorithm 2 that makes use
of separator sets.
function C ALL S UB(σ)
Qpar ← T OP(QStack)
Ve ← G ET VALUE F N(Q)
V¯e ← R EDUCE(Ve )
V˜e ← P ROJECT(V¯e , S)
Qe ← E XPECTATION(V˜e , Pe , σ)
Q ← A DD(Qr , Qc , Qe )
P USH(Q, QStack)
end function

4

Avg reward of learnt policy

2
0
−2
−4
−6
−8
0

HOCQ with separators
HOCQ
100

200

300

400

500

Num samples (x 1000)

Figure 7: Learning curves with and without making use of
separators
Example 4, it equals P (ωg0 |ωg ), the distribution of how traffic evolves each time a passenger is served (note that in this
case, the distribution does not actually depend on the exit
values of any of the separator variables).
The second component of our decomposition is the
exit distribution of just the separator variables, which are
directly related to the task being performed in the subroutine. At the passenger choice in Example 3, this compo0
nent is P (ωt,x,y
|ω, u), the exit distribution of time and position. Assuming deterministic moves, and a completion
that follows the shortest path towards its goal, this distribution depends only on the current location and the passenger’s source and destination. At the passenger choice in
Example 4, the second component is the exit distribution of
c, x,y, i.e., a distribution over taxi position and whether
the taxi falls of a cliff during the subroutine. Again, this
depends on the taxi’s location and the passenger’s source
and destination.
In Figure 7, we measure the effect of using the separator decomposition in Example 3. We let the traffic variable be an integer between 0 and 10, and made it follow
a random walk with a slight upward drift over time. The
toll is proportional to the square of the traffic. Without the
separator conditions, the algorithm must directly learn the
exit distribution of traffic as a function of passenger choice,
and learns quite slowly. When the separator conditions are
used, the algorithm can now take advantage of the abstractions described above, and learns much faster.

7 Local policies
The exit distribution of the separator variables is not always
as easy to abstract as in the last two examples.
Example 5. Consider a combination of Examples 3 and 4
where traffic evolves every timestep and there are cliffs.
Suppose we are at the navigation choice in this example, and the traffic is below the threshold beyond tolls
will be charged. In a few steps, we will reach a fork in the
road, and must choose between two paths. The first path
is safe and slow, and the other is fast goes through mountainous regions. Suppose the rewards are such that if the
traffic doesn’t change much before we reach the fork, then
it will make sense to choose the slow route, but if the traffic
level rises sufficiently during this period, it will make sense
to risk the fast route to increase the chance of avoiding the
toll. The traffic when making the future choice, in turn, depends on the current traffic. So, somewhat surprisingly, the
exit distribution of t for the optimal completion depends on
the current traffic, even though traffic has no direct effect
on events within the subroutine (recall that it only affects
the toll, not how fast the taxi moves). The problem is that
separated variables may nevertheless affect future decisions
made in the subroutine, and so any quantity that is relevant
to predicting future values of these variables becomes relevant to the exit distribution of the separator variables.
Unfortunately, it does not seem possible to handle
such cases exactly while keeping the exit distribution compact. In this example, we could probably ignore the traffic
without much harm, but in general, such an approximation
would systematically underestimate the exit value, because
it would be based on the assumption that future decisions
are made using an unsafe abstraction. As an alternative, we
show a further level of structure in the exit distribution that
allows more principled approximations.
The dependence between the exit distribution of the
separator variables and the current value of the separated
variables is not arbitrary; it only happens via the separated
variables’ effect on the exit value function, and therefore
on the “local policy” at future choices in the subroutine.
Definition 6. Let π be a completion, ωW an instantiation
to a set W of variables, and L = V \ W . The local policy
πωW is defined by πωW (ωL ) = π(ωW,L ).
Suppose we are at a state ω 0 in some subroutine σ, and
that D is decoupled from the root subroutine of the program. Let the trajectory of states after ω 0 be ω 1 , ω 2 , . . ..
There is a corresponding random sequence of local polii . Let ~
π = (π 1 , π 2 , . . .) and note that ~π is
cies π i = πωD
independent of u given ω. We now rewrite
Pe (ωS0 |ω, u) =

X

P (~π |ω)P (ωS0 |ω, u, ~π )

(1)

~
π

where P (~π |ω) is once again “general knowledge”, and conditional on a given ~π , future decisions in the subroutine will
no longer depend on variables in D.

In our quest for simplicity, we have replaced a large
but finite, observable object (ωD ) with an unbounded, unobservable one (~π ). This might not seem like progress. But
in fact, we never have to represent ~π explicitly, since it only
serves as a hidden mixture component. Also, we claim that
(1) exposes numerical structure for function approximators
and provides a useful “hook” for specifying prior knowledge. The infinite mixture can often be well approximated
by a small finite one, where each of the components in the
reduced model corresponds to an event such as “I’m not in
a hurry now, but will be when I reach the upcoming fork”.

8 Related Work and Conclusions
In addition to the work mentioned in the introduction, many
other bodies of research have explored the ideas of the decomposition of value functions and exit distributions in hierarchical reinforcement learning. [Dean and Lin, 1995],
[Hauskrecht et al., 1998], and [Parr, 1998] are all based
on the idea of dividing the state space of an MDP into regions which communicate via small sets of interface states
(which would be subroutine call and exit states, in our
case), solving the subproblems separately, and combining
the solutions somehow. These papers mainly utilize structure in the state-transition graph, and deal with planning
given a model. In contrast, we have focused on viewing
states as factored into a set of variables, and on how structure within this factored representation can lead to representational and statistical benefits in learning. An interesting question is whether this factored structure also has
algorithmic benefits, i.e., can it be used in conjunction with
the methods of the aforementioned papers to yield more
efficient planning algorithms? We note also that our notion of local policies is reminiscent of the policy-cache idea
of [Parr, 1998], and it might be possible to use the methods for policy-cache construction therein to approximate
the mixture representation of the exit distribution in Section 7.
A recent paper [Meuleau et al., 2006] studies the oversubscription planning problem, in which we are given a
set of tasks which consume resources and must complete
as many of them as possible given global resource constraints. The framework can be viewed as an ALisp program with a top-level loop that chooses the next task to do
and, for each task, a subroutine that chooses between actions for that task and aborting. The state is factored into
global variables (e.g. resource amounts), variables local to
each task and, for each task, an indicator for whether that
task is completed. In our terminology, while engaged in a
particular task, the exit values of the resource amounts and
the completion indicator for the current task are separators
for the remaining variables. The paper shows that under
a reset assumption, which states that if a task is aborted
before completion, its local variables revert to the initial
state, a dynamic programming algorithm that alternates between planning at the top-level and planning for subtasks

is guaranteed to converge. It would be interesting to see if
the algorithm can be extended to general hierarchies, and
without the reset assumption. A similar algorithm is also
suggested in [Dietterich, 2000].
In the options framework [Precup and Sutton, 1998],
models of the expected behavior of options are created that
are somewhat similar to the notion of Pe in our work. A
difference is that work in options thus far has usually assumed that the low-level options are specified beforehand,
whereas we are interested in the problem of simultaneously
planning at the low and high levels.
The primary contributions of this paper are to present
a method and a set of conditions under which hierarchically optimal solutions can be obtained without large representational and parameter learning costs. Unlike previous work that reasons explicitly about exit states of subroutines, our method generalizes easily to arbitrarily deep
hierarchies and captures the notion that the parent passes to
the child subroutine an exit value function that is as concise
as possible.
To keep the presentation focused, we have only discussed exact decomposition of the Q-function in this paper.
In practice, approximate versions of the factored exit and
separator conditions will be required, and the components
of the decompositions will themselves need to be approximated. Applying our algorithms to larger domains will
requiring facing these issues.
This work is but a step toward a full understanding
of the structure of value functions. The link between this
structure, the behavioural hierarchy, and the complexity of
decision making needs to be investigated further.

References
[Andre and Russell, 2002] D. Andre and S. Russell. State abstraction for programmable reinforcement learning agents. In
AAAI, 2002.
[Andre, 2003] D. Andre. Programmable Reinforcement Learning Agents. PhD thesis, UC Berkeley, 2003.
[Boutilier et al., 1999] C. Boutilier, T. Dean, and S. Hanks. Decision theoretic planning : structural assumptions and computational leverage. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
11:1–94, 1999.
[Dean and Lin, 1995] T. Dean and S.-H. Lin. Decomposition
techniques for planning in stochastic domains. In IJCAI, 1995.
[Dietterich, 2000] T. Dietterich.
Hierarchical reinforcement
learning with the maxq value function decomposition. JAIR,
13:227–303, 2000.
[Hauskrecht et al., 1998] M.
Hauskrecht,
N.
Meuleau,
C. Boutilier, L. Kaelbling, and T. Dean.
Hierarchical
solution of Markov decision processes using macro-actions.
In UAI, 1998.
[Meuleau et al., 2006] N. Meuleau, R. Brafman, and E. Benazera. Stochastic over-subscription planning using hierarchies of
MDPs. In ICAPS, 2006.
[Parr and Russell, 1997] R. Parr and S. Russell. Reinforcement
learning with hierarchies of machines. In NIPS, 1997.
[Parr, 1998] R. Parr. Flexible decomposition algorithms for
weakly coupled Markov decision processes. In UAI, 1998.
[Precup and Sutton, 1998] D. Precup and R. Sutton. Multi-time
models for temporally abstract planning. In NIPS, 1998.

