In this work, we propose a novel yet simple enhancement method. Given a
heuristic in the form of an imperfect policy π, the method adds an additional
arm at every internal node of the search tree. This special arm is labeled by
the action suggested by π and once selected, rolls out the rest of the sampling
episode using π. If the policy π works well at a state, we expect it to quickly
give a good estimate of the value of the state without relying too much on the
other arms. The method aims to get fast convergence to optimal values at states
where the heuristic policy is optimal, while retaining similar approximation as
the original UCT in other states.
We compared this method with two aforementioned techniques in two domains, namely Obstructed Sailing, an extension of the original Sailing problem
previously used to measure UCT’s performance in [2], and Sheep Savior, a large
state-space MDP that characterizes a generic two-player collaborative puzzle
game. The results showed that UCT-Aux the new algorithm (Aux for auxiliary
arms) significantly outperforms its competitors when coupled with reasonable
heuristics.
One nice property of this method is that it does not affect the implementation of other bootstrapping techniques: No modification of the action selection
formula nor the rollout policy at any leaf nodes except for the added arms is required. This allows different sources of bootstrapping knowledge to be combined
into one algorithm for more performance boost.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. We first give a brief overview
of MDP, UCT and its popular enhancements before presenting UCT-Aux. Next,
we describe two experimental setups for comparing the agents’ performance and
analyze the results. We also identify the common properties of the heuristics
used in two experimental domains and provide some insights on why UCTAux works well in those cases. Finally, we conclude the paper by discussing the
possible usage of UCT-Aux.

2
2.1

Background
Markov Decision Process

A Markov Decision Process characterizes a planning problem with tuple (S, A, T, R),
in which
– S is the set of all states,

– A is the set of all available actions,
– Ta (s, s0 ) = P (st+1 = s0 |st = s, at = a) is the probability that action a ∈ A
in state s ∈ S at time t will lead to state s0 ∈ S at time t + 1.
– Ra (s, s0 ) is the immediate reward received after the state transition from s
to s0 triggered by action a.
An action policy π is a function, possibly stochastic, that returns an action
π(s) for every state s ∈ S. In infinite-horizon discounted MDPs, the objective is
to choose an action policy π ∗ that maximizes some cumulative
of the
P∞ function
t
∗
received rewards, typically the expected discounted sum
t=0 γ Ra (st , st+1 )
with 0 ≤ γ < 1 being the discount factor. An MDP can be effectively solved
using different methods, one of which is the value iteration algorithm based
on the Bellman’s equation [9]. The algorithm maintains a value function V (s),
where s is a state, and iteratively updates the value function using the equation
!
X
0
0
0
Vt+1 (s) = max
Ta (s, s )(Ra (s, s ) + γVt (s )) .
a

s0

This value iteration algorithm is guaranteed to converge to the optimal value
function V ∗ (s), which gives the optimal expected cumulative reward of running
the optimal policy from state s.
The optimal value function V ∗ can be used to construct
the optimal policy
P
by taking action a∗ in state s such that a∗ = argmaxa { s0 Ta (s, s0 )V ∗ (s0 )}. The
optimal Q-function is constructed from V ∗ as follows:
X
Ta (s, s0 )(Ra (s, s0 ) + γV ∗ (s0 )).
Q∗ (s, a) =
s0

Q∗ (s, a) denotes the maximum expected long-term reward of an action a when
executed in state s.
One key issue that hinders MDPs and Value Iteration from being widely used
in real-life planning tasks is the large state space size (usually exponential in the
number of state variables) that is often required to model realistic problems.
2.2

Upper Confidence Bound Applied to Trees (UCT)

UCT [2] is an anytime algorithm that approximates the state-action value in real
time using Monte Carlo simulations. It was inspired by Sparse Sampling [10],
the first near-optimal policy whose runtime does not depend on the size of the
state space. The approach is particularly suitable for solving planning problems
with very large or possibly infinite state spaces.
The algorithm searches forward from a given starting state, building up a
tree whose nodes alternate between reachable future states and state-action pairs
(Figure 1). State nodes are called internal if their child state-action pairs have
been expanded and leaf otherwise. Starting with a root state, the algorithm
iteratively rolls out simulations from this root node; each time an internal node
is encountered, it is regarded as a multi-armed bandit and UCB1 [11] is used to

a0

S0	  

S0,a0	  

a0

S1	  

a1

a1
S0,a1	  

S2	  

S3	  
a0

a1

S1,a0	  

S1,a1	  

S3,a0	  

S3,a1	  

S4	  

S5	  

S6	  

S7	  

Fig. 1: A sample UCT search tree with two valid actions a0 and a1 at any state.
Circles are state nodes and rectangles are state-action nodes; solid state nodes
are internal while dotted are leafs.

determine the action or arm to sample, i.e., the edge to traverse. In particular,
at an internal node s, the algorithm selects an action according to
s
)
(
log n(s)
,
(1)
πU CT (s) = argmax QU CT (s, a) + 2Cp
n(s, a)
a
in which
– QU CT (s, a) is the estimated value of state-action pair (s, a), taken to be the
weighted average of its children’s values.
– Cp > 0 is a suitable hand-picked constant.
– n(s) is the total number of rollouts starting from s.
– n(s, a) is the number of rollouts that execute a at s.
At the chosen child state-action node, the simulator is randomly sampled for
a next state with accompanying reward; new states automatically become leaf
nodes. From the leaf nodes, rollouts are continued using random sampling until a
termination condition is satisfied, such as reaching terminal states or simulation
length limit. Once finished, the returned reward propagates up the tree, with the
value at each parent node being the weighted average of its child nodes’ values;
suppose the rollout executes action a at state s and accumulates reward R(s, a)
in the end.
– at state-action nodes, n(s, i) = n(s, i) + 1 and QU CT (s, a) = QU CT (s, a) +
1
n(s,a) (R(s, a) − QU CT (s, a))
– at state nodes, n(s) = n(s) + 1.
Typically one leaf node is converted to internal per rollout, upon which its child
state-action nodes are generated. When the algorithm is terminated, the root’s
arm with highest QU CT (s, a) is returned1 .
1

In practice, returning the arm with highest n(s, a) is also a common choice.

When used for infinite-horizon discounted MDPs, the search can be cut off at
an 0 -horizon. Given any  > 0, with 0 small enough, the algorithm is proven to
converge to the arm whose value is within the -vicinity of the optimal arm [2].
2.3

Enhancement methods

In vanilla UCT, new state-action nodes are initialized with uninformed default
values and random sampling is used to finish the rollout when leaving the tree.
Given a source of prior knowledge, Gelly and Silver [3] proposed two directions
to bootstrap UCT:
1. Initialize new action-state nodes with n(s, a) = nprior (s, a) and QU CT (s, a) =
Qprior (s, a), and
2. Replace random sampling by better-informed exploration guided by πprior .
We refer to these two algorithms as UCT-I (UCT with new nodes initialized
to heuristic values) and UCT-S (UCT with simulations guided by πprior ); UCTIS is the combination of both methods. UCT-I and UCT-S can be further tuned
using domain knowledge to mitigate the flaw of a bad heuristic and amplify the
influence of a good one by adjusting the dependence of the search control on the
heuristic at internal nodes. In this work, we do not investigate the effect of such
tuning to ensure a fair comparison between techniques when employed as is.
In the same publication [3], the authors proposed another bootstrapping technique, namely Rapid Action Value Estimation (RAVE), which we do not examine
in this work. The technique is specifically designed for domains in which an action from a state s has similar effect regardless of when it is executed, either at s
or after many moves. RAVE uses the All-Moves-As-First (AMAF) heuristic [12]
instead of QU CT (s, a) in Equation 1 to select actions. Many board games such as
Go or Breakthrough [5] have this desired property. In our experiment domains,
RAVE is not applicable, because the actions are mostly directional movements,
e.g., {N, E, S, W }, thus tied closely to the state they are performed at.

3

UCT-Aux: Algorithm

Given an added policy π, we propose a new algorithm UCT-Aux that follows
the same search control as UCT except for two differences.
1. At every internal node s, besides |A(s)| normal arms with A(s) being the
set of valid actions at state s, an additional arm labeled by the action π(s)
is created (Figure 2).
2. When this arm is selected by Equation 1, it stops expanding the branch but
rolls out a simulation using π; value update is carried out from the auxiliary
arm up to the root as per normal.
The method aims to better manage mixed-quality heuristics. If the heuristic
π’s value estimation at a state is good, we expect the added arm to dominate

S0	  

a0
S0,a0	  

a1

π(s0)

S0,a1	  

S0, π(s0)	  
	  

a0
S1,a0	  

S1	  
a1
S1,a1	  

π(s1)

S2	  

S1, π(s1)	  

S3	  
a0

a1

π(s3)

S3,a0	  

S3,a1	  

S3, π(s3)	  
	  

	  

S4	  

S5	  

S6	  

S7	  

Fig. 2: Sample search tree of UCT-Aux.

the distribution of rollouts and quickly give a good estimate of the state’s value
without the need to inspect other arms. Otherwise, the search control will focus
rollouts in ordinary arms, thus retaining similar approximation as vanilla UCT.
For stochastic heuristic policies, at every internal node, not one but κ auxiliary arms are added, with κ being the number of actions aπ such that P (π(s) =
aπ ) > 0. As such, the number of arms at internal nodes is bounded by 2|A| since
κ ≤ |A|.
Convergence Analysis
We will show that regardless of the added policy’s quality, UCT-Aux converges in
finite-horizon MDPs2 . The proof follows closely that of UCT analysis by treating
the auxiliary arms as any other ordinary arms. As a recap, UCT convergence
analysis revolves around the analysis of non-stationary multi-armed bandits with
reward sequences satisfying some drift conditions, which is proven to be the
case for UCT’s internal nodes with appropriate choice of bias sequence Cp 3 . In
particular, the drift conditions imposed on the payoff sequences go as follows:
Pn
– The expected values of the averages X in = n1 t=1 Xit must converge for
all arms i with n being the number of pulls and Xit the payoff of pull t. Let
µin = E[X in ] and µi = limn→∞ µin .
– Cp > 0 can be chosen such that the tail inequalities P (X i,n(i) ≥ µi +ct,n(i) ) ≤
q
ln t
t−4 and P (X i,n(i) ≤ µi − ct,n(i) ) ≤ t−4 are satisfied for ct,n(i) = 2Cp n(i)
with n(i) being the number of times arm i is pulled up to time t.
Firstly, we will show that all internal nodes of UCT-Aux have arms yielding
rewards satisfying the drift conditions. Suppose the horizon of the MDP is D, the
number of actions per state is K and the heuristic policy is deterministic (κ = 1);
2

3

As mentioned in [2], for use with discounted infinite-horizon MDPs, the search tree
can be cut off at the effective 0 -horizon with 0 being the desired accuracy at root.
Empirically, Cp is often chosen to be an upper bound of the accumulated reward
starting from the current state.

this can be proven using induction on D. Note that i.i.d. payoff sequences satisfy
the drift conditions trivially due to Hoeffding’s inequality.
– D = 1: Suppose the root has already been expanded, i.e., become internal.
It has K + 1 arms, which either lead to leaf nodes (ordinary arms) or return
i.i.d. payoffs (auxiliary arm). Since leaf nodes have i.i.d. payoffs, all arms
satisfy drift conditions.
– D > 1: Assume that all internal state nodes under the root have arms
satisfying the drift conditions, e.g., s1 and s3 in Figure 2. Consider any
ordinary arm of the root node (the added arm’s payoff sequence is already
i.i.d.), for instance, (s0 , a1 ). Its payoff average is the weighted sum of payoff
sequences in all leafs and state-action nodes on the next two levels of the
subtree, i.e., leaf s2 , arms (s3 , a0 ), (s3 , a1 ) and (s3 , π(s3 )), all of which satisfy
drift conditions due to either the inductive hypothesis or producing i.i.d.
payoffs. Theorem 4 in [2] posits that the weighted sum of payoff sequences
conforming to drift conditions also satisfies drift conditions; therefore, all
arms originating from the root node satisfy drift conditions.
As a result, the theorems on non-stationary bandits in [2] hold for UCTAux’s internal nodes as well. Therefore, we can obtain similar results to Theorem
6 of [2], with the difference being statistical measures related to the auxiliary
arms such as µaux and ∆aux , i.e., the new algorithm’s probability of selecting a
suboptimal arm converges to zero as the number of rollouts tends to infinity.

4

Experiments

We compare the performance of UCT-Aux against UCT, UCT-I, UCT-S and
UCT-IS in two domains: Obstructed Sailing and Sheep Savior. Obstructed Sailing extends the benchmark Sailing domain by placing random blockage in the
map; the task is to quickly move a boat from one point to a destination on a
map, disturbed by changing wind, while avoiding obstacles. Sheep Savior features a two-player maze game in which the players need to herd a sheep into its
pen while protecting it from being killed by two ghosts in the same environment.

5

Obstructed Sailing

The Sailing domain, originally used to evaluate the performance of UCT [2],
features a control problem in which the planner is tasked to move a boat from a
starting point to a destination under certain disturbing wind conditions. In our
version, there are several obstacles placed randomly in the map (see Figure 3a).
In this domain, the state is characterized by tuple hx, y, b, wprev , wcurr i with
(x, y) being the current boat position, b the current boat posture or direction,
wprev the previous wind direction and wcurr the current wind direction. Directions take values in {N, NE, E, SE, S, SW, W, NW}, i.e. clockwise starting from
North. The controller’s valid action set includes all but the directions against

(a) Obstructed Sailing sample map

(b) SailTowardsGoal

Fig. 3: Obstructed Sailing domain; (a) a randomized starting configuration,
(b) SailTowardsGoal heuristic produces near-optimal estimates/policies in good
cases but misleads the search control in others.

wcurr , out of the map or into an obstacle. After each time step, the wind has
roughly equal probability to remain unchanged, switch to its left or its right [13].
Depending on the relative angle between the action taken and wcurr , a cost
from 1 to 4 minutes is incurred. Additionally, changing from a port to a starboard
tack or vice versa causes a tack delay of 3 minutes. In total, an action can cost
anywhere from 1 to 7 minutes, i.e., Cmin = 1 and Cmax = 7 [13]. We model the
problem as an infinite-horizon discounted MDP with discount factor γ = 0.99.
5.1

Choice of heuristic policies

A simple heuristic for this domain is to select a valid action that is closest to the
direction towards goal position regardless of the cost, thereafter referred to as
SailTowardsGoal. For instance, in the top subfigure of Figure 3b, at the starting
state marked by “S”, if current wind is not SW, SailTowardsGoal will move the
boat in the NE direction; otherwise, it will execute either N or E.
This heuristic is used in UCT-I and UCT-IS by initializing new state-action
nodes with values
nST G (s, a) ← 1
0

1 − γ d(s ,g)+1
QST G (s, a) ← C(s, a) + Cmin
1−γ
with C(s, a) being the cost of executing action a at state s and d(s0 , g) the
minimum distance between next state s0 and goal position g. The initialized

value can be seen as the minimum cost incurred when all future wind directions
are favorable for desired movement. For UCT-S, the random rollouts are replaced
by π(s) = argmaxa QST G (s, a).
Heuristic quality. This heuristic works particularly well for empty spaces,
producing near-optimal plans if there are no obstacles. However, it could be
counterproductive when encountering obstacles. In the bottom subfigure of Figure 3b, if a rollout from the starting position is guided by SailTowardsGoal, it
could be stuck oscillating among the starred tiles, thus giving inaccurate estimation of the optimal cost.
5.2

Setup and results

The trial map size is 30 by 30, with fixed starting and goal positions at respectively (2, 2) and (27, 27) (Figure 3a). We generated 100 randomized instances of
the map, where obstacles are shuffled by giving each grid tile p = 0.4 chance
to be blocked 4 . Each instance is tried five times, each of which with different
starting boat postures and wind directions.

Fig. 4: Performance comparison of UCT, UCT-S, UCT-I, UCT-IS and UCT-Aux
when coupled with the heuristic SailTowardsGoal; y-axis is the reward average
with error bars being the standard errors of the means.

All UCT variants (UCT, UCT-I, UCT-S, UCT-IS and UCT-Aux) use the
same Cp = Cmax /(1 − γ) = 700 and the search horizon5 is set to be 300; an
4

5

We tried with different values of p ∈ {0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5} and they all yield similar
results as Figure 4; the detailed charts are not presented due to space constraint.
The search horizon is chosen to be long enough so that the cost accumulated after
the horizon has small effect to the total cost.

optimal path should not be very far from 60 steps as most actions move the boat
closer to the goal. The exact optimal policy is obtained using Value Iteration.
Note that the performance of Optimal agent varies because of the randomization
of starting states (initial boat and wind direction) and map configurations.
Given the same number of samplings, UCT-Aux outperforms all competing
UCT variants, despite the mixed quality of the added policy SailTowardsGoal
when dealing with obstacles (Figure 4). Note that without parameter tuning,
both UCT-I and UCT-S are inferior to vanilla UCT, but between UCT-I and
UCT-S, UCT-I shows faster performance improvement when the number of samplings increases. The reason is because when SailTowardsGoal produces inaccurate heuristic values, UCT-I only suffers at early stage while UCT-S endures
misleading guidance until the search reaches states where the policy yields more
accurate heuristic values. The heuristic’s impact is stronger in UCT-S than UCTI: UCT-IS’s behavior is closer to UCT-S than UCT-I.

6

Sheep Savior

This domain is an extension of the Collaborative Ghostbuster game introduced
in [14] as the testbed for their assistance framework for collaborative games.
The game features two players (a shepherd and a dog) whose task is to herd
a sheep into its pen while avoiding it to be killed by two ghosts in a maze-like
environment. All non-player characters (NPCs) run away from the players within
a certain distance, otherwise the ghosts chase the sheep and the sheep runs away
from ghosts. Since ghosts can only be shot by the Shepherd, the dog’s role is
strictly to gather the NPCs (Figure 5).
Both protagonists have 5 movement actions (no move, N, S, E and W) while
Shepherd has an additional action to inflict damage on a nearby ghost, hence a
total of 30 compound actions. The two players are given rewards for successfully
killing ghosts (5 points) or herding sheep into its pen (10 points). If the sheep
is killed, the game is terminated with penalty -10. The discount factor in this
domain is set to be 0.99.
6.1

Choice of heuristic policies

The game can be seen as having three subtasks, each of which is the task of
catching a single ghost or herding a single sheep, as shown in Figure 5. Each of
these subtasks consists of only two players and one NPC, hence has manageable
complexity and can be solved exactly offline using Value Iteration.
A heuristic Q-value can be obtained by taking the average of all individual
subworlds’, or subtasks’, Q-values, as an estimate for one state-action pair’s
value. Specifically, at state s the policy, GoalAveraging, yields
nGA (s, a) ← 1
m

QGA (s, a) =

1 X
Qi (si , a)
m i=1

Fig. 5: Task decomposition in Sheep Savior.

in which si is the projection of s in subtask i, m is the number of subtasks,
i.e. three in this case, and Qi (si , a) are subtasks’ Q-values. The corresponding
heuristic policy can be constructed as πGA (s) = argmaxa QGA (s, a).
Heuristic quality. GoalAveraging works well in cases when the sheep is
well-separated from ghosts. However, when these creatures are close to each
other, the policy’s action estimation is no longer valid and could yield deadly
results. The under-performance is due to the fact that the heuristic is oblivious
to the interactivity between subtasks, in this case, ghost-killing-sheep scenarios.
6.2

Setup and results

The map shown in Figure 5 is tried 200 times, each of which with a different randomized starting configurations. We compare the means of discounted rewards
produced by the following agents: Random, GoalAveraging, UCT, UCT-I, UCTS, and UCT-Aux. The optimal policy in this domain is not computed due to the
prohibitively large state space, i.e., 1045 ∗ 32 ≈ 1011 since each ghost has at
most two health points. All UCT variants have a fixed planning depth of 300.
In our setup, one second of planning yields roughly 200 rollouts on average, so
we do not run simulations with higher numbers of rollouts than 10000 due to
time constraint. Moreover, in this game-related domain, the region of interest is
in the vicinity of 200 to 500 rollouts for practical use.
As shown in Figure 6, UCT-Aux outperforms the other variants, especially
early on with small numbers of rollouts. UCT-S takes advantage of GA better
than UCT-I, which yields even worse performance than vanilla UCT. Observing
the improvement rate of UCT-S we expect it to approach UCT-Aux much sooner
than others, although asymptotically all of them will converge to the same optimal value when enough samplings are given and the search tree is sufficiently
expanded; the time taken could be prohibitively long though.

Fig. 6: Performance comparison of Random, GoalAveraging, UCT, UCT-S,
UCT-I, and UCT-Aux when coupled with Goal Averaging.

7

Discussions

Although UCT-Aux shows superior performances in the experiments above, we
observe that the chosen heuristic policies share a common property that is crucial
for UCT-Aux’s success: they show behaviors of “make it or break it”. In other
words, at most states s, their action value estimate Qπ (s, a) is either near-optimal
or as low as that of a random policy Qrand (s, a).
Specifically, in Obstructed Sailing, if following SailTowardsGoal can bring
the boat from a starting state to goal position, e.g., when the line of sight
connecting source and destination points lies entirely in free space, the resultant
course of actions does not deviate much from the optimal action sequences.
However when the policy fails to reach the goal, it could be stuck fruitlessly. For
instance, Figure 3b depicts one such case; once the boat has reached either one
of three starred tiles underneath the goal position, unless at least three to five
wind directions in a row are E, SailTowardsGoal results in oscillating the boat
among these starred tiles. The resultant cost is therefore very far from optimal
and could be as low as the cost incurred by random movement.
In contrast, an example for heuristics that are milder in nature is the policy StochasticOptimal.0.2 which issues optimal actions with probability 0.2 and
random actions for the rest. This policy is also suboptimal but almost always
yields better estimation than random movement; it is not as “extreme” as SailTowardsGoal. Figure 7, which charts the performance histograms of StochasticOptimal.0.2 alongside with SailTowardsGoal, shows that a majority of runs with
SailTowardsGoal yield costs that are either optimal or worse than Random’s.
Similarly, GoalAveraging in Sheep Savior is also extreme: By ignoring the
danger of Ghosts when around Sheep, it is able to quickly herd the Sheep in the
Pen or kill nearby Ghosts (good), or end the game prematurely by forcing the

Fig. 7: Performance histograms of heuristics in Obstructed Sailing. The returned
costs of a heuristic are allocated relatively into bins that equally divide the cost
difference between Random and Optimal agents; x-axis denotes the bin number
and y-axis the frequency.

Sheep into Ghosts’ zones (bad). We hypothesize that one way to obtain extreme
heuristics is by taking near-optimal policies of the relaxed version of the original planning problem, in which aspects of the environment that cause negative
effects to the accumulated reward are removed. For instance, SailTowardsGoal
is in spirit the same as the optimal policy for maps with no obstacle, while
GoalAveraging should work well if the ghosts do not attack sheep.
As UCT-Aux is coupled with heuristic policies with this “extreme” characteristic, rollouts are centralized at auxiliary arms of states where π(s) is nearoptimal, and distributed to ordinary arms otherwise. Consequently, the value
estimation falls back to the default random sampling where π produces inaccurate estimates instead of relying entirely on π as does UCT-S.
7.1

When does UCT-Aux not work?

Figure 8 charts the worst-case behavior of UCT-Aux when the coupled heuristic’s
estimate is mostly better than random sampling but much worse than that of the
optimal policy, e.g. the heuristic StochasticOptimal.0.2 in Obstructed Sailing.
The reason behind UCT-Aux’s flop is the same as that of UCT, i.e., due
to the overly “optimism” of UCB1, as described in [8]. At each internal node,
samplings are directed into suboptimal arms that appear to perform the best so
far, exponentially more than the rest (Theorem 1 [2]) when convergence has not
started. Even though each arm is guaranteed to be sampled an infinite number
of times when the number of samplings goes to infinity (Theorem 3 [2]), the subpolynomial rate means only a tiny fraction of samplings are spent on attempting
bad-looking arms. As a result, in a specially designed binary tree search case,
UCT takes at least Ω(exp(exp(...exp(2)...))) samplings before the optimal node
is discovered; the term is a composition of D − 1 exponential functions with D
being the number of actions in the optimal sequence.

Fig. 8: Bad case of UCT-Aux when coupled with StochasticOptimal.0.2.
Samplings
UCT
UCT-S
UCT-I
UCT-IS
UCT-Aux

500
268.4
268.9
279.2
278.6
159.2

1000
555.4
558.6
583
586
256.7

2000
1134.6
1157.3
1200.7
1209.2
447.8

5000
2694.5
2733.2
2805
2834.8
889.5

10000
5395.7
5424.7
5620
5657.1
1341.7

20000
11041.7
11212.7
11519.4
11704.4
1981.3

50000
27107.4
27851.2
28123.8
28872.5
3117.9

100000
53235.9
54382.2
55393.7
56401.2
4317.1

200000
107107
109308
111418
113682
5970.11

Table 1: The average number of tree nodes for UCT variants in Obstructed
Sailing when coupled with StochasticOptimal.0.2.

UCT-Aux falls into this situation when coupled with suboptimal policies
whose estimates are better than random sampling: At every internal node, it
artificially creates an arm that is suboptimal but produces preferable reward
sequences when compared to other arms with random sampling. As a result,
the auxiliary arms are sampled exponentially more often while not necessarily
prescribing a good move. Table 1 shows some evidence of this behavior: Given the
same number of samplings, UCT-Aux constructs a search tree with significantly
less nodes than other variants (up to 20 times). That means many samplings
have ended up in non-expansive auxiliary arms because they were preferred.
7.2

Combination of UCT-Aux, UCT-I and UCT-S

UCT-Aux bootstraps UCT in an orthogonal manner to UCT-I and UCT-S, thus
allowing combination with these common techniques for further performance
boost when many heuristics are available. Figure 9 charts the performance of

such combinations in Obstructed Sailing. UCT-Aux variants use SailTowardsGoal at the auxiliary arms while UCT-I/S variants use StochasticOptimal.0.2
at the ordinary arms. UCT-Aux-S outperforms both UCT-Aux and UCT-S at
earlier stage, and matches the better performer among the two, i.e. UCT-Aux,
in a long run.

Fig. 9: Combination of UCT-Aux with UCT-I/S/IS in Obstructed Sailing.

8

Conclusion

In this work, we have introduced a novel yet simple technique to bootstrap UCT
with an imperfect heuristic policy in a popular non-adversarial domain, i.e.,
planning in large-state space MDPs. It is shown to be able to leverage on the
well-performing region while avoiding the bad regions of the policy, empirically
outperforming other state-of-the-art bootstrapping methods when coupled with
the right policy, i.e, the “extreme” kind. Our conclusion is that if such property is
known before hand about a certain heuristic, UCT-Aux can be expected to give
a real boost over the original UCT, especially in cases with scarce computational
resource; otherwise, it would be safer to employ the currently prevalent methods
of bootstrapping. As such, a different mentality can be employed when designing
heuristics specifically for UCT-Aux: instead of safe heuristics that try to avoid
as many flaws as possible, the designer should go for greedier and “riskier” ones.
Lastly, since UCT-Aux is orthogonal to other commonly known enhancements,
it is a flexible tool that can be combined with others, facilitating more options

when incorporating domain knowledge into the vanilla MCTS algorithm. In the
future, we plan to examine how to adapt the method to adversarial domains.

9

Acknowledgments

This research is partially supported by a GAMBIT grant ”Tools for Creating
Intelligent Game Agents”, no. R-252-000-398-490 from the Media Development
Authority and an Academic Research Grant no. T1 251RES1005 from the Ministry of Education in Singapore.

References
1. Coulom, R.: Efficient selectivity and backup operators in Monte-Carlo Tree Search.
In: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Computers and Games,
Springer-Verlag (2006) 72–83
2. Kocsis, L., Szepesvári, C.: Bandit based Monte-Carlo Planning. Volume 4212 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2006) 282–293
3. Gelly, S., Silver, D.: Combining online and offline knowledge in UCT. In: ICML
’07: Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Machine Learning, New
York, NY, USA, ACM (2007) 273–280
4. Chaslot, G., Fiter, C., Hoock, J.B., Rimmel, A., Teytaud, O.: Adding expert
knowledge and exploration in Monte-Carlo Tree Search. Advances in Computer
Games (2010) 1–13
5. Finnsson, H., Björnsson, Y.: Simulation-based approach to General Game Playing.
In: AAAI’08: Proceedings of the 23rd National Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
AAAI Press (2008) 259–264
6. Balla, R.K., Fern, A.: UCT for tactical assault planning in real-time strategy
games. In: 21st International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. (2009)
40–45
7. Bouzy, B., Helmstetter, B.: Monte-Carlo Go developments. Advances in computer
games 10 (2004) 159–174
8. Coquelin, P.A., Munos, R.: Bandit algorithms for tree search. In: Proceedings of
the 23rd Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. (2007) 67–74
9. Bellman, R.: A Markovian Decision Process. Indiana Univ. Math. J. 6 (1957)
679–684
10. Kearns, M., Mansour, Y., Ng, A.Y.: A sparse sampling algorithm for near-optimal
planning in large Markov Decision Processes. Machine Learning 49 (2002) 193–208
11. Auer, P., Cesa-Bianchi, N., Fischer, P.: Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed
bandit problem. Machine Learning 47 (2002) 235–256
12. Brügmann, B.: Monte Carlo Go. Physics Department, Syracuse University, Tech.
Rep (1993)
13. Vanderbei,
R.:
Sailing
strategies:
An
application
involving
stochastics,
optimization,
and
statistics
(SOS).
Available
via
http://orfe.princeton.edu/˜rvdb/sail/sail.html (1996)
14. Nguyen, T.H.D., Hsu, D., Lee, W.S., Leong, T.Y., Kaelbling, L.P., Lozano-Perez,
T., Grant, A.H.: Capir: Collaborative action planning with intention recognition.
In: Proceedings of the Seventh Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment International Conference (AIIDE 2011), AAAI, AAAI Press (2011)

