structural properties. We define a procedure as a sequence of operations whose execution serves to reach a Goal, and where the
elements of the sequence are either primitive actions or subGoals which themselves call for associated procedures.
We define the "Ideal" Expert knowledge of a system as the knowledge that is sufficient to the system and that is described in a
semantic
network
(figure
2).
Construction of the Ideal Expert Knowledge starts if given a set of Tasks that are executed using elements of one technical
device through procedures. The first step is the task decomposition as a hierarchy of Goal decomposition into subGoals from
the level of the Goal of the task to primitive actions. The second step consists in :
i - drawing up a list of possible Goals and the procedures to reach these Goals,
ii - constructing the Ideal Expert Net as a classical semantic network.
But, instead of using structural properties of system's interface Objects, Goals reachable with those Objects are used as
properties. The ideal user's description uses valid procedures that have to be applied to the elements of the device in order to
successfully complete the task. Classes of Objects and relations between classes of Objects merge from routines for
classification and routines for classes organization. The above principle may be derived from an algebraic entity: the Galois
lattice of a binary relation (Barbut and Monjardet, 1970). Given a set of objects and a set of properties, we can built the binary
relation composed by the set of all couples object-property for which the object holds the property. Such a binary relation may
be presented a in two way table with objects in lines and properties in columns, checking cells structural properties of
geometrical shapes are organised, we obtain the binary relation shown by the (figure 2), called the Hass diagram of the lattice.
Several algorithms have been proposed to built the Galois lattice of a binary relation (Norris, 1978; Ganter, 1984; Bordat,
1986). This kind of lattices, and the Hasse diagram which is used to draw them, have severed to investigate categorization
problems (Guénoche & Van Mechelen, 1993; Storms, Van Mechelen & De Bocck, 1994). Figure (2) shows how the Galois
lattice is used to formalize the class inclusion relation underlying data in table 1 by the mean of the double partial orders over:
i - the set of objects,
ii - the set of properties.
The resulting structure is a two way lattices in which, when a set of objects A includes a set of objects B, the set of properties of
the objects in A are included into the set of properties of the objects in B, and vice versa.
The nodes of such a graph are called formal concepts by Wille (1982) because they clearly express the classical duality
between the extension and the intension of concepts.
In summary, a basic Ideal Expert Net (figure 1) is a hierarchy of abstract and concrete classes represented as a single directed
graph [G: (N, G, R)] which is defined to consist of a set of nodes N (representing classes of Objects), a set of attributes G
(representing Goals) and a set of relations R (representing classes inclusion) between nodes.
Finally, the structural properties of Objects are added focusing on those that justify the application of the Procedures attached
to the object in hand. Note that, by answering queries of the users while they try to perform a given goal, the Expert Assistant
delivers not only planning information, but also a goal structure and the knowledge of what justifies the procedure by providing
the knowledge that is included in the Ideal Expert Net.
If the Assistance System does not understand the meaning of an instruction, it discusses with the user until it is able to interpret
the query in its own language. With the learning of new words in natural language as the interpretation produced in agreement
with the user, the system improves its representation scheme at each experiment with a new user and, in addition, takes
advantage of previous discussions with users :
i - the standard Objects and recognized by the software are described in a semantic network where goals stand for
properties of Objects,
ii - as the queries of an user are expressed in natural language and as they correspond more or less to these standard
denominations, the system establishes fuzzy connections between its primary knowledge and the new labels of Objects or
procedures expressed by the user.
For instance, since a new attribute (new verb) can be identified with more than one primary attribute, we found convenient to
use degrees of appropriateness of each such identification. For this purpose, we used the framework of fuzzy set theory and we
describe fuzzy characterizations of classes of Objects with Goals as properties. Possibility and/or certainty measures enable us

2

to quantify the opinion of users regarding the degree of similarity or convenience of associations between descriptions of both
Objects and procedures.
In the next section, we present the proposed system dealing with degrees of membership of an Object or a procedure formulated
in the user's language to one of the classes of the fuzzy semantic network. It takes into account the degree of inclusion between
fuzzy classes and the grade of membership of an instance to one or several classes. Rossazza (90) introduced the concept of
fuzzy Objects and Dubois and Prade (1989) addressed the problem of typicality of class hierarchy, but very few works have
been proposed in this direction, specially as a way of planning actions.
3. The Fuzzy Semantic Net of Novice Users
However given the polysemic aspects of natural language (verbs and nouns which express goals and device objects), with
the necessity of a man-machine interface that involve queries of users, the problem that is under investigation is how to match
the content of a query (the label of an Object and the label of a Goal applied to this Object, as expressed by a novice user) to
their corresponding items (class of Objects and Goals as properties) in the Ideal Expert Net.

P roced u re P i

( P r o p e r ti e s ) Y

P roced u re P k

Z (p r o p er ties)

P roced u re P j

X ( p r o p e r ti e s )
I n c lu s io n r e la tio n ( X i s a k in d o f

Y)

Figure1: Procedural Semantic Net representation with inclusion relations. Procedural and declarative semantics of the device
merges in regard of applied procedures. Classes Y and Z inherit of procedures of superordinate classes as class X inherits of
procedures of both Y and Z classes (multiple inheritance).

Key
Direction
(Forward)
Direction
(Backward)
Choose
Select
Press

Forward-Word

Backward-Word

X

Forward-Char

Char

Word

X

X

Uni
t
X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X

X
X

X
X

BackwardChar

X
X

X
X

Direction

X

X

Table 1.

Word
choose*

BackWardWord
[direction(Backward)]
ForWardWord
[direction(Forward)]

Unit
[direction(Direction)]
select*

BackWardChar
[direction(Backward)
Char
choose*
Key
press

ForWardChar
[direction(Forward)]
Backward
choose*

Direction
Forward
choose*

Figure 2. Fuzzy Semantic Network
The example of the technical system we consider here is a Word Processor software, with Objects such as "chain-ofcharacters", and procedures such as "cut" or "copy". For a novice user of the software, the list of standard denominations is not
obvious and he often would like to ask an expert operator about how to execute an action such as "how to rub letters".

3

To describe common sense knowledge, different kinds of relationships must be used. They are necessary, sufficient and
possible for Torasso and Console [Rossazza, 90], necessary and typical for Padgham [Padgham, 88]. At a theoretical level, the
first organisation, as defined by Torasso and Console, appears to be powerful. However, it is difficult to define the sufficient
linguistic value in practical applications and we do not use this concept [Tijus & Poitrenaud, 1992]. In our present work, we
distinguish necessary properties from possible ones and we do not consider sufficient conditions. It follows that each Object or
procedure is described by three fuzzy areas (necessary, possible and user areas), which describe the properties of the attributes
A.
3.1. Fuzzy areas
N

Necessary area : The necessary area Z (P, A) of a linguistic value P of an attribute A is the set of couples (necessary
linguistic value, necessity degree) admissible for A relatively to P. This area is fuzzy because some values are less admissible
than others.
Example 2 :
Attribute : procedure
domain:[EraseMenu,EraseWithkey, Select, CutWithMenu]
value :Erase
Necessary-area:[(EraseWithMenu, 1) (EraseWithKey, 0.9) (CutWithMenu, 0.6)]
N

The value of Z (Erase, Procedure) is obtained from a necessity distribution. The latter is given by one expert using
EraseWithMenu, EraseWithKey and CutWithMenu to design the system linguistic value Erase.
P

Possible area: The possible area Z (P, A) of a linguistic value P of an attribute A is the set of couples (possible
linguistic value, possibility degree) admissible for A relatively to P. This area is also obtained from a possibility distribution
given by a system expert.
Example 3 :
attribute :procedure
domain :[EraseWithMenu, EraseWithKey, Select, CutWithMenu]
value :Erase
Possible-area:[(EraseWithMenu, 1) (EraseWithKey, 1) (CutWithMenu, 0.8)]
U

User area: The user area Z (P, A) of a linguistic value P of an attribute A is the set of couples (user linguistic value,
possibility degree) admissible for A relatively to P. This set is obtained from the user reasoning.
The necessary, the possible and the user areas allow to define attributes of Objects classes.
3.2. Fuzzy attributes
a) System's fuzzy attributes : The structure of System attributes A is as follows:

[(

(

)) ( (

A: P1 Z1N , Z1P ... Pk Z kN , ZkP

))]

(1)

Where
N
P
Pi is the i-th linguistic variable of A, Zi is the fuzzy necessary area associated with Pi , Zi is the fuzzy possible area
associated with Pi .
Example 4 :
System goals :[
(Erase ( Necessary-area:{(EraseWithMenu,1) (EraseWithKey, 0.9) (CutWithMenu, 0.6)}
possible-area:{(EraseWithMenu, 1) (EraseWithKey, 1) (CutWithMenu, 0.8)}))
(Select ( Necessary-area:{(SelectToGoThrough, 1)(SelectTo Delimit, 0.8)}
possible-area:{(SelectToGoThrough, 1)(SelectTo Delimit, 1)}))]
b) User's fuzzy attributes : The structure of the user's attribute has two kinds of descriptions. The first one is a set of fuzzy
areas and the second one is a set of couples (linguistic possible value, possibility degree). They are shown as follows:

4

A :[A1 (Z1

U

).. . An (Z nU )]

( 2)

Where
Ai are user's linguistic variables of the attribute A,
U
Zi the user's area fuzzy values.

For a couple (possible linguistic value, associate degree), this structure becomes:

A:[ A1 {( p11 , d11 ),. .., ( p1k , d 1k )},. .. , An {( p n1 , d n1 ), .. ., ( p n l , d n l )}]

( 3)

Where
Ai linguistic variables associated with A,

Pik possible linguistic variables associated with Ai .
d ik possible linguistic variables associated with Pik .
The definition of the user's attribute is as follows:
U

Definition 1: Let Pi , i ∈ [1, n], a set of user's linguistic variables. We define a user's attribute A by:

A = Z ( P1 ) × Z ( P 2 )× . .. × Z ( Pn )
U

U

U

U

( 4)

Example 5 :
attribute: procedure
domain : [EraseWithMenu, EraseWithKey, Select, CutWithMenu]
value : Gum
User's area.: [(EraseWithMenu, 1) (EraseWithKey, 0.7) (CutWithMenu, 0.5)]
N

P

Three kinds of attributes can therefore be define for the object O: necessary attribute A , possible attribute A and user
U
attribute A . These attributes are fuzzy as results of the Cartesian products of fuzzy areas. The set of attributes describes
U
classes and instances. Properties of A are user properties which can't be used in the theoretical definition of classes and
instances.
Definition 2 : Let Ai , i ∈ [1, n] be a set of attributes. We define class C as:

C = A1 × A 2 × . . . × An

(5)

Definition 3 : Let a i , i ∈ [1, n] be a set of attributes Ai , i ∈ [1, n]. We define an instance I , with analogy to a class, as :

I = a1 × a 2 × . . . × a n
4.

( 6)

Hierarchical relation

The integration of fuzzy properties; as ‘to efface’, in the Object’s description implies the valuation of relations in [0, 1]
(Omri, 1993; Omri 1994, Omri & Tijus 98). There are two kinds of relationships: the relation ‘kind-of’ between two classes
and the relation ‘is-a’ between a class and an instance. One class may be a kind-of an other class, this to some extend. Each
kind of relationship is described by a membership value obtained from the inclusion between areas or between attributes.
We define degrees of inclusion in the following sections for variables, attributes, classes and instances.

5

Object

Command

(0.5, 1)

(0.75, 1)
The letters

Figure 3.a. : valued "is-a" link

Character

Word

(0.25, 1)

(0.5, 1)
The number

.

Figure 3.b. : valued "is-kind-of" link.

In figure 3.a, ‘The letters’ appears as a ‘kind-of’ ‘Command’ with the couple of values (0.75, 1), the first number is the
necessity coefficient and the second is the possibility coefficient. It is also a ‘kind-of’ ‘Object’ with (.5, 1) as a couple of values.
In figure 3.b, ‘the number’ is-a ‘Character’ with necessity coefficient 0.25, possibility coefficient 1 and is-a ‘Word’ with 0.5
and 1 as necessity and possibility coefficients respectively.
4.1. Inclusion between fuzzy linguistic variables
Let Y be a universe linguistic values, T and S are two linguistic variables defined on Y. T = {(t1 , d 1 ),. . . ,(t n , d n1 )} and
'
'
S = {(s1 , d1 ), ... , (s m , d m )}, where ti and s j , i ∈ [1, n], j ∈ [1, m], respectively the different linguistic values of T and S. d i
'

and d j degree associated with ti and s j .
*

Definition 4 : Let f T ∩ S be the membership function which results from the intersection of linguistic variables T and S defined
on the same universe Y. We define inclusion degree of T in S by:

∑
Deg * (T ⊂ S ) =
∑

y ∈Y

f T*∩ S ( y )

y ∈Y

f T* ( y )

( 7)

*
f T is the membership function of the linguistic variable T.

It can be applied for necessary and possible areas, * standing for N or P.
a) Case of system attribute
Definition 5 : Let Deg (T ⊂ S ) and Deg
resulting degree is obtained as follows:
N

P

(T ⊂ S ) be the necessary and possible inclusion degrees of T in S. The

Deg N ( T ⊂ S ) + Deg P (T ⊂ S )
Deg ( T ⊂ S ) =
2
In the particular case where T=S, we have Deg (T ⊂ S ) = 1 .

(8)

b) Case of user's attribute
Definition 6 : Let f T and f T ∩ S be respectively the membership functions associated with T and T ∩ S . We define the
inclusion degree of T in S by:

6

Deg( T ⊂ S ) =

∑
∑

y ∈Y

f T ∩ S ( y)

y ∈Y

( 9)

f T ( y)

4.1.1. Inclusion between fuzzy attributes
Definition 7 : Let T 1 , T 2 , .. ., T i , i linguistic variables for an attribute A, S1 , S2 ,. . . , Si , i linguistic variables for an attribute B
where T 1S1 , T 2 S 2 , . . ., T i Si respectively defined on the same universe. We define inclusion degree of A n B by:

( (

Deg( A ⊂ B ) = min Deg Tp ⊂ S p
1≤ p ≤ i

4.1.2.

))

(10)

Inclusion between fuzzy classes

Definition 8 : Let A1 , A2 , ... , An be n attributes which defines the fuzzy class C1 and B1 , B 2 ,. .. , B n , n attributes which define
the fuzzy class C 2 . We define inclusion degree of C1 in C 2 by :

Deg( C1 ⊂ C2 ) = min( Deg( Ai ⊂ Bi ))
1≤ i ≤ n

(11)

4.2. Instances and classes
In the case of a class and instance, we deal with degrees of membership degrees. These degrees measure the physical
representation of the class by the instances. They are obtained from inclusion degrees between fuzzy attributes. We define the
membership of an instance I in class C by :

Deg( I ∈ C ) = min( Deg(ai ∈ Ai )) (12 )
1≤ i ≤ n

5. Conclusion
Inspired by concepts produced in the framework of Object oriented programming tools, from researches in problem solving
(Tauber, 1988) and from analysing tasks like text editing and the use of a sophisticated telephone (Richard J.F., Poitrenaud S.
Tijus C., 1993), we implement the know-how (named "knowledge of an ideal expert") one needs to perfectly use any technical
system with semantics networks focusing on classes of Objects and their categorisation via class inclusion from the point of
view of the applied Goals they share: Goals are organized in a semantic network whose nodes are Object categories and whose
arcs indicate the class inclusion relation (Poitrenaud, 94).
6. References:
Barbut, M., & Monjardet, B. (1970). Ordre et classification: algèbre et combinatoire. Paris: Hachette.
Bouchon-Meunier B., Yager R.R., Zadeh L.A. (eds), (1991). Uncertainty in knowledge bases. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, 521, Springer Verlag.
Bouchon-Meunier, B., Tijus C.A., Omri, M.N. (1993). Fuzzy Sets Based System for User's Assistance: How Sifade diagnoses
user's goal. The Second Wold Congress on Expert Systems: "Moving towards Expert Systems Globally in the 21st
Century". Macmillian ed. CD Rom. Estoril, Lisbonne.
Card S.K., Moran T.P., Newell A. (1983). The Psychology of Human-Computer Interaction. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum
Génoche, A. & Van Mechelen, I. (1993). Galois approach to the induction of concepts. In I. Van Mechelen, J. Hampton, R.S.
Michalski, P. Theuns (Eds), Categories and concepts: Theoretical and inductive data analysis, (pp.287-308). London:
Academic Press.
Green T.R.G., Schiele F, Payne S.J. (1992). Formalisable models of user knowledge in human-computer interaction in working
with computers: Theory versus Outcome Van Der Veer G.C., Green T.R.G., Hoc J.M, Murray D.M. (eds) London
Academic Press.
Omri M.N. (1993). Définition de classes d'objets flouts pour la représentation des connaissances procédurales et déclaratives.
Troisième congrès national sur les applications des ensembles flous.Nîmes.
Omri M.N. (1994). Système interactif flou d’aide à l’utilisation de dispositifs techniques: SIFADE. Thèse de l’université Paris
vi, Paris.

7

Omri, N.M., Tijus, C.A., Poitrenaud, S. & Bouchon-Meunier, B.(1995). Fuzzy Sets and Semantic Nets For On-Line
Assistance. Proceedings of The Eleven IEEE Conference on Artificial Intelligence Applications. Los Angeles, February
20-22.
Omri, N.M. & Tijus, C.A. (1998). On-Line Assistance to User’s of Technological Systems using Fuzzy Sets and Semantic
Nets. FLAIR'98. Los Angeles.
Padgham L.(1988). A Model and Representation for Type Information and Its Use in Reasoning with Defaults. Proceedings of
AAAI, vol. 2, p 409-414.
Poitrenaud S., Richard J.F., Tijus C.A. (1990). An Object-oriented semantic description of procedures for evaluation of
interfaces. 5th European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics ECCE. Urbino, septembre 1990.
Richard J.F., Poitrenaud S. Tijus C. (1993). Problem-solving restructuration: elimination of implicit constraints. Cognitive
Science, vol. IV, 497-529.
Rossazza J.P. (1990). utilisation de hiérarchies de classes floues pour la représentation des connaissances imprécises et sujettes
à exceptions: système SORCIER. Thèse de 3ème cycle, Université Paul Sabatier.
Storms, G., Van Mechelen, I. & De Boeck, P. (1994). Structural analysis of the intension and extension of semantic concepts.
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 6, (1), 43-75.
Tauber, M. (1988). On mental models and the user interface. Human-computer interaction in Working with Computers: Theory
versus Outcome Van Der Veer G.C., Green, T.R.G., Hoc J.M., Murray, D.M. (eds) London. Academic Press.
Tijus C.A., Poitrenaud S. (1992). Semantic Networks of Action. NATO conference on Psychological and Educational
Foundations of Technology-Based Learning Environments. Kolymbari (Crete).
Tijus, Poitrenaud, Richard & Leproux, (in press). Une Methode de Pronostic des Erreurs et des Incidents pour la Conception
de Dispositifs. Le Travail Humain.
Torasso P., Console L. (1989). Approximate Reasoning and Prototypical knowledge. International journal of Approximate
Reasoning, vol. 3, no 2, pp 157-177.
Wille, R. (1982) Restructuring lattice theory: an approach based on hierarchies of concepts. In O. Rival (ed), Ordered Sets.
Boston: Reidel, pp:445-470.

8

