is that in parts of the state space that the expert tends
to avoid the samples are sparse and hence these methods may have difficulties with learning a good policy
at such places.
In an indirect method it is assumed that the expert
is acting optimally in the environment. In particular,
in inverse reinforcement learning the environment is
modelled as a Markovian decision problem (MDP) (Ng
and Russell, 2000). The dynamics of the environment
is assumed to be known (or it could be learnt from
samples which might even be unrelated to the samples
come from the expert). However, the reward function
that the expert is using is unknown. Recently Abbeel
and Ng (2004) gave an algorithm which was proven to
produce a policy which performs almost as well as the
expert, even though it is not guaranteed to recover the
expert’s reward function (recovering the reward function is an ill-posed problem). This approach might
work with less data since it makes use of the knowledge of model of the environment, which can help it
in generalizing to the less frequently visited parts of
the state space. One problem is that the algorithm of
Abbeel and Ng (2004) relies on the precise knowledge
of the features describing the reward function, which
is not a realistic assumption (for a discussion of this,
see Section 6). In particular, we will show that even
the correct scales of the features have to be known.
In this paper we propose a gradient algorithm that
combines the two approaches by minimizing a loss
function that penalizes deviations from the expert’s
policy like in supervised learning, but the policy is obtained by tuning a reward function and solving the
resulting MDP, instead of finding the parameters of a
policy. We will demonstrate that this combination can
unify the advantages of the two approaches in that it
can be both sample efficient and work even when the
features are just vaguely known.

296

NEU & SZEPESVÁRI

2

BACKGROUND

Let us first introduce some notation: For a subset
S of some topological space, S ◦ will be used to denote its
For a finite dimensional vector x,
Pinterior.
d
kxk = i=1 x2i shall denote its `2 -norm. Random variables will be denoted by capital letters (e.g., X,A), E [·]
stands for expectations.
We assume that the reader is familiar with basic concepts underlying Markovian decision processes
(MDPs) (e.g., Puterman 1994), hence we introduce
these concepts only to fix the notation. A finite, discounted infinite-horizon total reward MDP is defined
by a 5-tuple M = (X , A, γ, P, r), where
X is a finite set of states,
A is a finite set of actions,
γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor,
P gives the transition probabilities; P (x0 |x, a) stands
for the probability of the transition from state x
to x0 upon taking action a (x, x0 ∈ X , a ∈ A),
r is the reward function; r : X × A → R; r(x, a)
gives the reward incurred when action a ∈ A is
executed from state x ∈ X .
A stationary stochastic policy (in short:
P policy) is a
mapping π : A × X → [0, 1] satisfying a∈A π(a|x) =
1, ∀x ∈ X .1 The value of π(a|x) is the probability of
taking action a in state x. A policy is called deterministic if for any x, π(·|x) is concentrated on a single
action. The class of all stationary stochastic policies
will be denoted by Π.
For a fixed policy, the value of a state x ∈ X is defined
by
"∞
#
¯
X
¯
γ t r(Xt , At )¯¯ X0 = x ,
(1)
V π (x) = E
t=0

where (Xt , At )t≥0 is the sequence of random stateaction pairs generated by executing the policy π. The
function V π : X → R is called the value function underlying policy π.
We will also need action-value functions. The actionvalue function, Qπ : X × A → R, underlying policy π
is defined by
"∞
#
¯
X
¯
π
t
Q (x, a) = E
γ r(Xt , At )¯¯ X0 = x, A0 = a (2)
t=0
1

Instead of π(a, x) we use π(a|x) to emphasize that
π(·, x) is a probability distribution. Note that in finite
MDPs one can always find optimal (stochastic) stationary
policies (Puterman, 1994).

with the understanding that for t > 0, At ∼ π(·|Xt ).
A policy that maximizes the expected total discounted
reward over all states is called an optimal policy.
The optimal value function is defined by V ∗ (x) =
supπ V π (x), while the optimal action-value function is
defined by Q∗ (x, a) = supπ Qπ (x, a).
It turns out that V ∗ and Q∗ satisfy the so-called Bellman optimality equations (e.g., Puterman 1994). In
particular,
X
Q∗ (x, a) = r(x, a) + γ
P (y|x, a) max Q∗ (x, b). (3)
y∈X

b∈A

P
We call a policy that satisfies a∈A π(a|x)Q(x, a) =
maxa∈A Q(x, a) at all states x ∈ X greedy w.r.t. the
function Q. It is known that all policies that are greedy
w.r.t. Q∗ are optimal and all stationary optimal policies can be obtained these way.

3

APPRENTICESHIP LEARNING

Assume that we observe a sequence of state-action
pairs (Xt , At )0≤t≤T , the ‘trace’ of some expert. We
assume that the expert selects the actions by some
unknown policy πE : At ∼ πE (·|Xt ). The goal is to recover πE from the observed trace. The simplest solution is of course to use a supervised learning approach:
we select a parametric class of policies, (πθ )θ , πθ ∈ Π,
θ ∈ Rd , and try to tune the parameters so as to minimize some loss JT (πθ ), such as
X
JT (π) =
µ̂T (x)(π(a|x) − π̂E,T (a|x))2 , (4)
x∈X ,a∈A

where µ̂T (x) could be defined by µ̂T (x) = 1/(T +
PT
1) t=0 I{Xt =x} are the empirical occupation frequencies under the expert’s policy and π̂E,T (a|x) =
PT
PT
t=0 I{Xt =x} is the empirical est=0 I{Xt =x,At =a} /
timate of the expert’s policy.2 It is easy to see that JT
approximates the squared loss
X
J(π) =
µE (x)(π(a|x) − πE (a|x))2 (5)
x∈X ,a∈A

uniformly in π (the usual concentration results hold
for JT , e.g. Györfi et al. (2002)).
The reason π̂E,T is not used directly as a ‘solution’ is
that if the state space is large then it will be undefined for a large number of states (where µ̂E,T (x) = 0)
with high probability unless the number of samples is
enormous.
An alternative to direct policy learning is inverse reinforcement learning (Ng and Russell, 2000). The idea
2
If a state is not visited by the expert, the policy is
defined arbitrarily.

NEU & SZEPESVÁRI
is that given the expert’s trace, we find a reward function that can be used to explain the performance of
the expert. More precisely, the problem is to find a
reward function that the behavior of the expert is optimal for. Once the reward function is found, existing
algorithms are used to find a behavior that is optimal
with respect to it.
One difficulty in IRL is that solutions are non-unique:
e.g. if r is a reward function that recovers the expert’s
policy then for any λ ≥ 0, λr is also a solution (r = 0
is always a solution). For non-trivial problems there
are many solutions besides the variants that differ in
their scale only.
We propose here to unify the advantages of the direct and indirect approaches by (i) taking it seriously
that we would like to recover the expert’s policy and
(ii) achieve this through IRL so that we can achieve
good generalization at parts of the state space avoided
by the expert. We thus propose to find the parameters given a parametric family of rewards (rθ )θ ∈ Θ
such that the corresponding (near) optimal policy, πθ ,
matches the expert’s policy πE (more precisely, it’s
empirical estimate). The proposed method can be
written succinctly as the optimization problem
θ

J(πθ ) → min! s.t.

πθ = G(Q∗θ ),

(6)

where J is a loss function (such as (5) or (4)) aimed at
measuring the distance of πE and its argument, Q∗θ is
the optimal action-value function corresponding to the
reward function rθ and G is a suitable smooth mapping
that returns (near) greedy policies with respect to its
argument. One possibility, utilized in our experiments,
is to use Boltzmann action-selection policies (see (7)).3
In this paper we consider gradient methods to solve
the above optimization problem. One difficulty with
such an approach is that there could be many parameterizations that yield to the same loss. This will be
helped with the method of natural gradients, for which
the theory is worked out in the next section.
Another difficulty is that the mapping θ 7→ Q∗θ is nondifferentiable.We will, however, show that it is Lipschitz when rθ is Lipschitz and hence, by Rademacher’s
theorem it is differentiable almost everywhere (w.r.t.
the Lebesgue measure).
3.1

NATURAL GRADIENTS

Our ultimate goal is to find some parameters θ in a
parameter space Θ ⊂ Rd such that the policy πθ determined by θ matches the expert’s policy πE . For

297

facilitating the discussion let us denote the map from
the parameter space Θ to the policy space by h (i.e.,
h(θ) = πθ ). Thus, our objective function can be writ˜ = J(h(θ)), where J : Π → R is a (differenten as J(θ)
tiable) objective function defined over Π (such as (5))
˜ Incremental gradient
and the goal is to minimize J.
methods implement θt+1 = θt − αt gt , where αt ≥ 0
is an appropriate step-size sequence and gt = g(θ)
points in the direction of steepest ascent on the surface
˜
(θ, J(θ))
θ.
The gradient method with an infinitesimal step-size
gives rise to a trajectory (θ(t))t≥0 . This in turn determines a trajectory (π(t))t≥0 in the policy space, where
π(t) = h(θ(t)). Since our primary interest is the trajectory in the policy state, it makes sense to determine
the gradient direction g in each step such that π(t)
moves in the steepest descent direction on the surface
of (π, J(π))π . We call g = g(θ) the natural gradient if
this holds. Amari (1998) gives a method to find the
natural gradients using the formalism of Riemannian
spaces.
The advantage of this procedure is that the resulting
trajectories will be the same for any equivalent parameterization (i.e., if the parameter space is replaced
by some other space that is related to the first one
through a smooth invertible mapping, with a smooth
inverse). In addition, the gradient algorithm that uses
natural gradients can be proven to be asymptotically
efficient in a probabilistic sense and has the tendency
to alleviate the problem of ‘plateaus’ (Amari, 1998).
In order to define natural gradients we need some definitions. First, we need the generalization of derivatives for mappings f between Banach spaces.4 The
underlying idea is that the gradient (derivative) of
f : U → V provides a linear approximation to the
change f (u + h) − f (u):
Definition 1 (Fréchet derivative). Let U, V be Banach
spaces. A is the Fréchet-derivative of f at u if A :
U → V is a bounded linear operator and kf (u + h) −
f (u) − AhkV = o(khkU ). The mapping f then is called
Fréchet differentiable at u.
In what follows we view Π both as a vector space and
a complete metric space with some metric d. In our
application this metirc will be derived from the (unweighted) `2 -norm, but other choices would also work.
The following definition suggests a geometry induced
on Θ:
Definition 2 (Induced metric). Let Θ ⊂ Rd , θ ∈ Θ◦ .
We say that Gθ ∈ Rd×d is a pseudo-metric induced by

3

The benefit of choosing strictly stochastic policies is
that if the expert’s policy is deterministic, they force the
uniqueness of the solution.

4
A Banach space is a complete normed vector space. In
our case it will usually be a Euclidean space, e.g. Rd .

298

NEU & SZEPESVÁRI

(h, Π, d) at θ if Gθ is positive semidefinite and
d(h(θ + ∆), h(θ)) = ∆T Gθ ∆ + o(k∆k2 ).
The essence of this definition is that if the ‘distance’
between θ and θ + ∆ is given by ∆T Gθ ∆ then this
distance will match the distance of h(θ) and h(θ + ∆),
as k∆k → 0. It follows from the definition that the
induced pseudo-metric is unique.
In the rest of the paper we assume that Π is finite
dimensional to make the presentation of the results
easier. The following proposition is an immediate consequence of the definition of induced pseudo-metrics
and the definition of Fréchet differentiability:
Proposition 1. Assume that h : Θ → Π is Fréchet
differentiable at θ ∈ Θ◦ , Θ ⊂ Rd , Π = (Π, d) is a
complete, linear metric space. Then h0 (θ)T h0 (θ) is the
pseudo-metric induced by (h, Π, d) at θ.
Natural gradients can be obtained by the follow˜ +
ing procedure: Let g(θ; ε) = argmax∆∈S̃(θ,ε) J(θ
˜
∆) − J(θ)
be the direction of steepest ascent
over the ‘warped sphere’ S̃(θ, ε) = {∆ ∈
Rd | kh(θ + ∆) − h(θ)k = ε}.5 Then the set of natural gradients is given by
˜ (h) J(θ)
˜ def
∇
= lim inf 1ε g(θ; ε).
ε→0+

Here the limes inferior of the sets (g(θ; ε))ε>0 is meant
in the sense of the Painlevé-Kuratowski convergence
(Kuratowski, 1966): It then holds that no matter how
˜ (h) J(θ)
˜
ε converges to zero, g ∈ ∇
defines a direction
of steepest ascent on the surface of J at h(θ).
The following theorem holds:
Theorem 1. Let J : Π → R, h : Θ → Π, J˜ = J ◦
h. Assume that J is Fréchet differentiable and locally
Lipschitz and h : Θ → Π is Fréchet differentiable at
θ ∈ Θ◦ . Let Gθ = h0 (θ)T h0 (θ) be the pseudo-metric
˜
˜ ∈∇
˜ (h) J(θ),
at θ induced by (h, Π, d). Then G†θ ∇J(θ)
˜
˜
where ∇J(θ) is the ordinary gradient of J at θ and G†θ
denotes the Moore-Penrose generalized inverse of Gθ .
For the sake of specificity, when it does not cause con˜ the natural gradient of J˜ at θ.
fusion, we call G†θ ∇J(θ)
Note that from the construction it follows immediately
˜ are covariant for
that the trajectories of θ̇ = G†θ ∇J(θ)
any initial condition.
The proof borrows some ideas from the proof of Theorem 1 in (Amari, 1998). In order to spare some
space we only give an outline here: The basic idea
is to replace the warped sphere S̃(θ, ε) by the ‘sphere’
5

Note that g(θ; ε) is set-valued.

SGθ (θ, ε) = {∆ ∈ Rd | ∆T Gθ ∆ = ε2 }. This is justified since the ‘sphere’ SGθ (θ, ε) becomes arbitrarily
close to S̃(θ, ε) as ε → 0 and J˜ is sufficiently regular. The next step is to show that for some C > 0,
˜
CεG†θ ∇J(θ)
is a solution of the optimization problem argmax∆∈SG (θ,ε) J˜0 (θ)∆, and this solution tracks
θ
˜ + ∆) − J(θ)
˜ when
closely that of argmax∆∈SG (θ,ε) J(θ
θ
ε → 0.

4

CALCULATING THE GRADIENT

In order to calculate the natural gradient we need to
calculate the (Fréchet) derivative of h(θ) = G(Q∗θ ) and
the gradient of J(h(θ)).6 By the chain rule we obtain ∇J(h(θ)) = J 0 (h(θ))h0 (θ). Since calculating the
derivative of J (or JT ) is trivial, we are left with calculating the derivative of h(θ). As suggested previously,
we use a smooth mapping G. One specific proposal,
that we actually used in the experiments assigns Boltzmann policies to the action-value functions:
G(Q)(a|x) = P

exp[βQ(x, a)]
,
b∈A exp[βQ(x, b)]

(7)

where β > 0 is a parameter that controls how close
G(Q) is to a greedy action selection. With this choice
∂πθ
∂ ln[πθ (a|x)]
(a|x) = πθ (a|x)
∂θk
∂θk
Ã
!
∗
∂Q∗θ (x, b)
∂Qθ (x, a) X
= πθ (a|x)β
−
πθ (b|x)
.
∂θk
∂θk
b∈A

(8)
Hence, we are left with calculating ∂Q∗θ (x, a)/∂θk . We
will show that these derivatives can be calculated almost everywhere on Θ by solving some fixed-point
equations similar to the Bellman-optimality equations.
For this, we will need the concept of subdifferentials
and some basic facts:
Definition 3 (Fréchet Subdifferentials). Let U be a
Banach space, U ∗ be its topological dual.7 The Fréchet
subdifferential of f : U → R at u ∈ U , denoted by
∂ − f (u) is the set of u∗ ∈ U ∗ such that
lim inf khk−1 [f (u + h) − f (u) − hu∗ , ui] ≥ 0.

h→0,h6=0

The following elementary properties follow immediately from the definition (e.g., Kruger 2003):
Proposition 2. Let (fi )i∈I be a family of real-valued
functions defined over U and let f (u) = maxi∈I fi (u).
6

Remember that G maps action-value functions to policies and J measures deviations to the expert’s policy.
7
When U = Rd with the `2 -norm then U ∗ = Rd and for
u ∈ U, v ∗ ∈ U ∗ , hv ∗ , vi is the normal inner product.

NEU & SZEPESVÁRI
Then if u∗ ∈ ∂ − fi (u) and fi (u) = f (u) then u∗ ∈
∂ − f (u). If f1 , f2 : U → R, α1 , α2 ≥ 0 then α1 ∂ − f1 +
α2 ∂ − f2 ⊂ ∂ − (α1 f1 + α2 f2 ).
The next result states some conditions under which,
in a generalized sense, ‘taking a derivative and a limit
is interchangeable’. It is extracted from the proof of
Proposition 3.4 of Penot (1995):
Proposition 3. Assume that (fn )n is a sequence of
real-valued functions over U which converge to some
function f pointwise. Let u ∈ U , u∗n ∈ ∂ − fn (u)
and assume that (u∗n ) is weak∗ -convergent to u∗ and
is bounded. Further, assume that the following holds
at u: For any ε > 0, there exists some index N > 0
and a real number δ > 0 such that for any n ≥ N ,
h ∈ BU (0, δ),
fn (u + h) ≥ fn (u) +

hu∗n , hi

− εkhk.

Then u∗ ∈ ∂ − f (u).
Now, we state the main result of this section:
Proposition 4. Assume that the reward function rθ is
differentiable w.r.t. θ with uniformly bounded derivatives: sup(θ,x,a)∈Rd ×X ×A krθ0 (x, a)k < +∞. The following statements hold:
(1) Q∗θ is uniformly Lipschitz-continuous as a function of θ in the sense that for any (x, a) pair,
θ, θ0 ∈ Rd , |Q∗θ (x, a) − Q∗θ0 (x, a)| ≤ L0 kθ − θ0 k with
some L0 > 0;
(2) Except on a set of measure zero, the gradient,
∇θ Q∗θ , is given by the solution of the following
fixed-point equation:
ϕθ (x, a) = (rθ0 (x, a))T
P
P
+γ y∈X P (y|x, a) b∈A π(b|y)ϕθ (y, b), (9)
where π is any policy that is greedy with respect
to Qθ .
Note that (rθ0 (x, a))T ∈ Rd . In fact, the above equation
can be solved componentwise: The kth component of
the derivative can be obtained computing the action0
value function for the policy π using rθ,k
in place of
8
the reward function.
Proof. Let T : RX ×A → RX ×A be the Bellman operator
X
(T Q)(x, a) = rθ (x, a) + γ
P (y|x, a) max Q(y, b).
y∈X

b∈A

8
0
Here rθ,k
is the kth component of the derivative of the
reward function with respect to θ. We also note in passing
that if rθ is convex in θ then so is Qθ . This follows with
the reasoning followed in the proof of the first part.

299

By elementary arguments, if Q is L-Lipschitz in θ, then
T Q is R + γL-Lipschitz in θ, where R is such that for
any θ, θ0 ∈ Rd , (x, a) ∈ X × A, |rθ (x, a) − rθ0 (x, a)| ≤
Rkθ − θ0 k. Choose Q0 = 0. As is well known (e.g.,
Puterman (1994)), Qn = T n Q0 converges to Q∗ : Q∗θ =
limn→∞ T n Q0 . Hence, by the previous argument Q∗
is R + γR + γ 2 R + . . . = R/(1 − γ)-Lipschitz, proving
the first part of the statement.
For the second part, for a policy π, let us define the
operator Sπ , acting over the space of functions φ :
X × A → Rd , by
(Sπ φ)(x, a) = (rθ0 (x, a))T
P
P
+γ y∈X P (y|x, a) b∈A π(b|y)φ(y, b).
Let π denote a greedy policy w.r.t. Q∗θ and let πn
be a sequence of policies that are
Pgreedy w.r.t. Qn
and where ties are broken so that x∈X ,a∈A |π(a|x) −
πn (a|x)| is minimized. It follows that for n large
enough, πn = π. Now, consider the sequence ϕ0 = 0,
ϕn+1 = Sπn ϕn . Then for n large enough we have
ϕn+1 = Sπ ϕn . By induction, ϕn (x, a) ∈ ∂θ− Qn (x, a)
holds for any n ≥ 0. Indeed, this clearly holds for
n = 0, while the general case follows by Proposition 2.
Now, observe that Sπ acts separately on each of the d
components of its argument and when it is restricted
to any of these components, it is a contraction. Hence,
ϕn converges to the fixed point of Sπ , i.e., the solution
of (9). By Proposition 3 the limit is a subdifferential of
limn→∞ Qn = Q∗θ (that the condition of this proposition is satisfied follows from the uniform convergence of
ϕn in θ, which follows since krθ0 k is uniformly bounded
in both θ and (x, a)). Now, since by the first part Q∗θ
is Lipschitz-continuous in θ, by Rademacher’s theorem
it is differentiable almost everywhere. It is well-known
that if a function is differentiable then its subderivative
coincides with its derivative (see e.g. Kruger (2003)).
This finishes the proof of the statement.

5

COMPUTER EXPERIMENTS

The goal of the experiments was to assess the efficiency
of the algorithm and to test its robustness. We were
also interested in how it compares with the algorithm
of Abbeel and Ng (2004).
We have implemented three versions of our algorithm:
(i) gradient descent using plain gradients, (ii) gradient descent using natural gradients (iii) RPROP using plain gradients.9 RPROP is a popular adaptive
step-size selection algorithm that proved to be very
competitive in a number of settings Riedmiller and
9

We tried a “natural RPROP” variant as well (RPROP
using natural gradients), but perhaps suprisingly, it give
much poorer results than the other algorithms.

NEU & SZEPESVÁRI

Braun (1993). We have implemented the variant described in Igel and Hüsken (2000). We also implemented the “max margin” and the “projection” algorithms described in Abbeel and Ng (2004) to be able
to compare the different approaches. Results will be
shown for “max margin”. The projection algorithm is
computationally more efficient, but we have found it
less reliable and less data efficient.

−1

10

−2

10
J(πθ)

300

Natural grad.

We decided to use two test environments: The familiar
grid world that has also been used by Abbeel and Ng
(2004) and the sailing problem due Vanderbei (1996).
The reward function was linear in the unknown parameters.
5.1

−3

10

RPROP
−4

10

Plain grad.
Max margin
2

4

10
10
Number of training samples

GRID WORLD

We have run the first series of experiments in grid
worlds, where each state is a grid square and the four
actions correspond to moves in the four compass directions with 70% success. We constructed the reward function as a linear combination of 5 features
(φi : X → R, i = 1, . . . , 5), where the features were essentially randomly constructed. The optimal parameter vector θ∗ consists of evenly distributed random
values from [−1, 1]. In general we try to approximate
the reward function with the use of the same set of
features that has been used to construct it, but we
also examine the situation of unprecisely known features. The size10 of the grid worlds was set to 10 × 10.
Value iteration was used for finding the optimal policy
(or gradients) in all cases. Unless otherwise stated the
data consists of 10 independent trajectories following
the optimal policy, each having a length of 100 steps.
The learning rate was hand-tuned (with a little effort)
and the number of iterations is kept at 100 (usually,
convergence happens much earlier). In all cases, the
performance measure is the error function JE , defined
by (5) and we measure the performance of the optimal policy computed for the found reward function.
For the “max margin” algorithm we show the performance of the overall best policy found during the first
100 iterations, thus optimistically biasing these measurements.
We examined the algorithms’ behavior when (i) the
number of the training samples was varied (Figure 1),
(ii) the features were linearly transformed (Figure 2,
Table 1, row 2), and when (iii) the features were perturbed (Table 1, row 3).
We see from Figure 1 that for small sample sizes plain
gradient is doing the best, while eventually natural
gradient becomes the winner. Note that the scale on
the y axis is logarithmic, so the differences between
10
Preliminary experiments confirm that our conclusions
would not change significantly for other sizes.

Figure 1: Performance as a function of the number of
training samples. Each curve is an average of 10 runs
using different samples, with 1/10 s.e. error bars.
these algorithms is not big. “Max margin” also catches
up at the end, just like RPROP.
Figure 2 shows the effect of transforming the features
linearly (the true reward function still remains in the
span of the features). Clearly, “Max Marging” suffers badly, while the natural gradient algorithm and
RPROP are little affected. Plain gradient descent is
slowed down, but eventually converges to good solutions.
In practice, it is not realistic to assume that a subspace containing the reward function is known. To
test how the algorithms behave without this assumption we perturbed the features by adding uniform
[− max(φi )/2, max(φi )/2] random numbers to them.
Results are shown in row 3 of Table 1. The results indicate the robustness of natural gradients and RPROP.
Both plain gradients and “max margin” suffer large
losses under these adverse conditions.
5.2

SAILING

We also applied the algorithms to the problem of “sailing” proposed by Vanderbei (1996). In this problem
the task is to navigate a boat from one point to another
in the shortest possible time. Thus, this is a stochastic shortest path (SSP) problem. Formally, we have
a grid of waypoints connected by legs, at each waypoint the sailor has to select one of these eight legs to
move on to the next waypoint. The state space in this
setting is constructed from the actual situation of the
boat and the direction from where the wind is blowing
at the specific moment. The eight actions of selecting
the next waypoint have different costs depending on
the direction of the wind: e.g. it costs more time to

NEU & SZEPESVÁRI

Original
Transformed
Perturbed

Natural
Mean
0.0051
0
0.0163

gradients
Deviation
0.0010
0
0.0165

RPROP
Mean
0.0130
0.0110
0.0197

301

Plain gradients
Mean
Deviation
0.0011 0.0068
0.0256 0.0237
0.1377 0.3428

Deviation
0.0134
0.0076
0.0179

Max margin
Mean
Deviation
0.0473 0.1476
0.0702 0.0228
0.2473 0.3007

Table 1: Means and deviations of errors. The row marked ’original’ gives results for the original features, the
row marked ‘transformed’ gives results when features are linearly transformed, the row marked ‘perturbed’ gives
results when they are perturbed by some noise.

1.4
0.25

1.2

Natural gradients
Natural gradients

0.8

Rprop
0.6

Plain gradients

0.4

Error rate

J(πθ)

1

Max margin

0.15
0.1

Maximum margin

0.2
0

0.2

0.05
20

40
60
Number of iterations

0

80

10

1

10

2

3

4

10
10
10
Number of training episodes

Figure 2: Performance with linearly transformed features. The features were transformed by a (nonsingular) square matrix with uniform [0, 1] random elements. Each curve is an average of 25 runs with different scalings of the features, the 1/10 s.e. error bars
are also plotted.

Figure 3: Performance as a function of the number
of training episodes. The fraction of states where the
found policy differs from the actual optimal policy is
plotted against the number of episodes observed., measured by the mean of 5 runs. The 1/2-s.e. error bars
are also plotted for both methods.

sail 45 degrees against the wind than to sail 45 degrees
in the wind direction etc.. We assume that the wind
changes follow a Markov process. The reward function
is given using a linear combination of the six features of
(away, down, cross, up, into, delay), as defined in Vanderbei (1996) (all defined as a map φ : X × A → R).
The following weighting was used in the experiments:
θ∗ = (−1, −2, −3, −4, −100000, −3)T .

again that the gradient method outperforms the “max
margin” algorithm by a significant amount.

Results as a function of the number of episodes is
shown in Figure 3 for natural gradients and the “max
margin” algorithm. In this case the number of iterations is set to 1000 and we again computed the optimal
policy with the reward found by the algorithm. As a
more tangible performance measure in this case, we
show the number of states where the actions selected
by the found policy differ from the ones selected by
the policy followed by the expert. The results here are
shown fro a small lake of size 4×4.11 The conclusion is
11
Our preliminary experiments show that the new algorithm performs reasonably for larger problems, too.

6

RELATED WORK

Our main concern in this section is the algorithm of
Abbeel and Ng (2004). This algorithm returns policies that come with the guarantee that their average
total discounted reward computed from the expert’s
unknown reward function is in the ε-vicinity of the expert’s performance. We claim that this guarantee will
be met only when the scaling of the features in the
method and the ‘true’ scaling match each other. Actually, this observation led us to the algorithms proposed
here.
In order to explain why the algorithm of Abbeel and
Ng (2004) is sensitive to scalings, we need some background on the algorithm. A crucial assumption in this
algorithm is that the reward function is linearly parameterized, i.e., r(x) = θ∗T φ(x), where φ : X → Rd

302

NEU & SZEPESVÁRI

and θ∗ ∈ Rd is the vector of unknown parameters. It
follows that the expected total discounted reward is
θT φE , where φE ∈ Rd is the so-called feature expectation underlying the expert. From the trajectory of
the expert this can be estimated. In fact, we can define φπ for any policy π and express the expected total
discounted reward as θT φπ . The main idea of Abbeel
and Ng (2004) is then that it suffices to find a policy π whose feature expectations φπ matches φE since
|θ∗T φπ − θ∗T φE | ≤ kθ∗ k2 kφπ − φE k2 .
However, a major underlying hidden assumption (implicit in the formalism of Abbeel and Ng (2004)) is that
the scaling of the features is√known. To see this assume
that d = 2, θ∗,1 = θ∗,2 = 2/2, kφπ − φE k2 ≤ ε and
in particular φE,1 = 0, φE,2 > 0, φπ,1 = −ε, φπ,2 = 0.
Further, assume that the features are rescaled by
λ = (λ1 , λ2 ). In the
scale the expert’s perfor√ new
T
φ
mance is √
ρE (λ) = 2/2λ
√ E and π’s performance is
ρπ (λ) = 2/2λT φπ = 2/2(λT φE − λ1 ε). A natural requirement is that for any scaling λ, ρπ (λ)/ρE (λ)
should be lower bound by a positive number (or rather
a number close to 1 − ε). By straightforward calculations, ρπ (λ)/ρE (λ) = 1−(λ1 /λ2 )ε/φE,2 → −∞, hence
although kφπ − φE k2 ≤ ε, the actual performance of π
can be quite far from the performance of the expert if
the scaling of the features does not match the scaling
used in the algorithm.
More recently, Ratliff et al. (2006) have proposed an algorithm which uses similar ideas to the ones of Abbeel
and Ng (2004). Just like Abbeel and Ng (2004) they
measure performance with respect to the original reward function and not by the difference of the expert’s
policy and the policy returned.

7

CONCLUSIONS

In the paper we have argued for the advantages of unifying the direct and indirect approaches to apprenticeship learning. The proposed procedure attempts to optimize a cost function, yet it chooses the policy based
on a model and thus may overcome problems usually
associated with method that directly try to match the
expert’s policy. Although our method has shown stable behaviour in our experiments, more work is needed
to fully explore the limitations of the method. One
significant barrier for applying the method (as well as
other methods based on IRL) is that it needs to solve
MDPs many times. This is problematic since solving
an MDP is a challenging problem on its own. One
idea is to turn to two time-scale algorithms that run
two incremental procedures in parallel, exploiting that
a small change to the parameters would likely cause
small changes in the solutions; as confirmed by our
theoretical results. There are many important direc-

tions to continue this work: The present work assumed
that states are observed. This could be replaced by the
assumption that sufficiently rich features are observed,
however, when this is not satisfied the method won’t
work. For large state-spaces one needs to use function
approximation techniques to carry out the computations. It is an open question if the methods would
generalize to such settings. Another important direction is to consider infinite MDPs. This presents some
technical difficulties, but we expect that the methods
could still be generalized to such settings. Yet another interesting direction is to replace the parametric
framework with a non-parametric one.
Acknowledgements
Csaba Szepesvári greatly acknowledges the support received through the Alberta Ingenuity Center for Machine Learning (AICML). This work was supported in
part by the PASCAL pump priming project “Sequential Forecasting and Partial Feedback: Applications to
Machine Learning”. This publication only reflects the
authors’ views.

References
Abbeel, P. and Ng, A. Y. (2004). Apprenticeship learning
via inverse reinforcement learning. In ICML’04, pages
1–8.
Amari, S. (1998). Natural gradient works efficiently in
learning. Neural Computation, 10(2):251–276.
Györfi, L., Kohler, M., Krzyżak, A., and Walk, H. (2002).
A Distribution-Free Theory of Nonparametric Regression. Springer-Verlag.
Igel, C. and Hüsken, M. (2000). Improving the Rprop learning algorithm. In ICSC/NC 2000, pages 115–121.
Kruger, A. (2003). On Fréchet subdifferentials. J. of Math.
Sciences, 116:3325–3558.
Kuratowski, K. (1966). Topology, volume I. Academic
Press, New York.
Ng, A. and Russell, S. (2000). Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In ICML-2000, pages 663–670.
Penot, J. (1995). On the interchange of subdifferentiation
and epi-convergence. Journal of Math. Anal. and Appl.,
196:676–698.
Puterman, M. (1994). Markov Decision Processes — Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., New York, NY.
Ratliff, N., Bagnell, J., and Zinkevich, M. (2006). Maximum margin planning. In ICML’06, pages 729–736.
Riedmiller, M. and Braun, H. (1993). A direct adaptive method for faster backpropagation learning: The
RPROP algorithm. In IEEE ICNN’93, pages 586–591.
Vanderbei, R. (1996).
Optimal sailing strategies, statistics and operations research program.
http://www.sor.princeton.edu/˜rvdb/sail/sail.html.

