The second idea underlying the Dyna architecture is that
learning and planning are similar in a radical sense. Planning in the Dyna architecture consists of using the model
to generate imaginary experience and then processing the
transitions of the imaginary experience by model-free reinforcement learning algorithms as if they had actually occurred. This can be shown, under various conditions, to
produce exactly the same results as dynamic-programming
methods in the limit of infinite imaginary experience.
The original papers on the Dyna architecture and most subsequent extensions (e.g., Singh 1992; Peng & Williams
1993; Moore & Atkeson 1993; Kuvayev & Sutton 1996)
assumed a Markov environment with a tabular representation of states. This table-lookup representation limits the
applicability of the methods to relatively small problems.
Reinforcement learning has been combined with function
approximation to make it applicable to vastly larger problems than could be addressed with a tabular approach.
The most popular form of function approximation is linear function approximation, in which states or state-action
pairs are first mapped to feature vectors, which are then
mapped in a linear way, with learned parameters, to value
or next-state estimates. Linear methods have been used
in many of the successful large-scale applications of reinforcement learning (e.g., Silver, Sutton & Müller 2007;
Schaeffer, Hlynka & Jussila 2001). Linear function approximation is also simple, easy to understand, and possesses some of the strongest convergence and performance
guarantees among function approximation methods. It is

natural then to consider extending Dyna for use with linear
function approximation, as we do in this paper.
There has been little previous work addressing planning
with linear function approximation in an online setting.
Paduraru (2007) treated this case, focusing mainly on sampling stochastic models of a cascading linear form, but
also briefly discussing deterministic linear models. Degris,
Sigaud and Wuillemin (2006) developed a version of Dyna
based on approximations in the form of dynamic Bayes networks and decision trees. Their system, SPITI, included
online learning and planning based on an incremental version of structured value iteration (Boutilier, Dearden &
Goldszmidt 2000). Singh (1992) developed a version of
Dyna for variable resolution but still tabular models. Others
have proposed linear least-squares methods for policy evaluation that are efficient in the amount of data used (Bradtke
& Barto 1996; Boyan 1999, 2002; Geramifard, Bowling &
Sutton 2006). These methods can be interpreted as forming and then planning with a linear model of the world’s
dynamics, but so far their extensions to the control case
have not been well suited to online use (Lagoudakis &
Parr 2003; Peters, Vijayakumar & Schaal 2005; Bowling,
Geramifard, & Wingate 2008), whereas our linear Dyna
methods are naturally adapted to this case. We discuss
more specifically the relationship of our work to LSTD
methods in a later section. Finally, Atkeson (1993) and others have explored linear, learned models with off-line planning methods suited to low-dimensional continuous systems.

2

Notation

We use the standard framework for reinforcement learning with linear function approximation (Sutton & Barto
1998), in which experience consists of the time indexed
stream s0 , a0 , r1 , s1 , a1 , r2 , s2 , . . ., where st ∈ S is a state,
at ∈ A is an action, and rt ∈ R is a reward. The actions are selected by a learning agent, and the states and rewards are selected by a stationary environment. The agent
does not have access to the states directly but only through
a corresponding feature vector φt ∈ Rn = φ(st ). The
n
agent selects actions
P according to a policy, π : R × A →
[0, 1] such that a∈A π(φ, a) = 1, ∀φ. An important step
towards finding a good policy is to estimate the value function for a given policy (policy evaluation). The value function is approximated as a linear function with parameter
vector θ ∈ Rn :
(∞
)
X
θ> φ(s) ≈ V π (s) = Eπ
γ t−1 rt | s0 = s ,
t=1

where γ ∈ [0, 1). In this paper we consider policies that are
greedy or -greedy with respect to the approximate statevalue function.

Algorithm 1 : Linear Dyna for policy evaluation, with random sampling and gradient-descent model learning
Obtain initial φ, θ, F, b
For each time step:
Take action a according to the policy. Receive r, φ0
θ ← θ + α[r + γθ> φ0 − θ> φ]φ
F ← F + α(φ0 − F φ)φ>
b ← b + α(r − b> φ)φ
temp ← φ0
Repeat p times (planning):
Generate a sample φ from some distribution µ
φ0 ← F φ
r ← b> φ
θ ← θ + α[r + γθ> φ0 − θ> φ]φ
φ ← temp

3

Theory for policy evaluation

The natural place to begin a study of Dyna-style planning
is with the policy evaluation problem of estimating a statevalue function from a linear model of the world. The model
consists of a forward transition matrix F ∈ Rn × Rn (incorporating both environment and policy) and an expected
reward vector b ∈ Rn , constructed such that F φ and b> φ
can be used as estimates of the feature vector and reward
that follow φ. A Dyna algorithm for policy evaluation goes
through a sequence of planning steps, on each of which a
starting feature vector φ is generated according to a probability distribution µ, and then a next feature vector φ0 = F φ
and next reward r = b> φ are generated from the model.
Given this imaginary experience, a conventional modelfree update is performed, for example, according to the linear TD(0) algorithm (Sutton 1988):
θ ← θ + α(r + γθ> φ0 − θ> φ)φ,

(1)

or according to the residual gradient algorithm (Baird
1995):
θ ← θ + α(r + γθ> φ0 − θ> φ)(φ − γφ0 ),

(2)

where α > 0 is a step-size parameter. A complete algorithm using TD(0), including learning of the model, is
given in Algorithm 1.
3.1

Convergence and fixed point

There are two salient theoretical questions about the Dyna
planning iterations (1) and (2): Under what conditions on
µ and F do they converge? and What do they converge
to? Both of these questions turn out to have interesting answers. First, note that the convergence of (1) is in question
in part because it is known that linear TD(0) may diverge
if the distribution of starting states during training does not
match the distribution created by the normal dynamics of

the system, that is, if TD(0) is used off-policy. This suggests that the sampling distribution used here, µ, might
have to be strongly constrained in order for the iteration
to be stable. On the other hand, the data here is from the
model, and the model is not a general system: it is deterministic1 and linear. This special case could be much better
behaved. In fact, convergence of linear Dyna-style policy
evaluation, with either the TD(0) or residual-gradient iterations, is not affected by µ, but only by F , as long as µ exercises all directions in the full n-dimensional vector space.
Moreover, not only is the fact of convergence unaffected by
µ, but so is the value converged to. In fact, we show below
that convergence is to a deterministic fixed point, a value
of θ such that the iterations (1) and (2) leave it unchanged
not just in expected value, but for every individual φ that
could be generated by µ. The only way this could be true is
if the TD error (the first expression in parentheses in each
iteration) were exactly zero, that is, if
0

=

r + γθ> φ0 − θ> φ
>

>

b φ + γθ F φ − θ φ

=

(b + γF > θ − θ)> φ.

And the only way that this can be true for all φ is for the
expression in parenthesis above to be zero:
0

Before verifying the conditions of this result, let us
rewrite (4) in terms of the matrix G = I − γF :
θk+1

= θk + αk (b> φk + θk> (γF − I)φk )φk

= b + (γF > − I)θ,

= θk + αk sk .

=

(I − γF > )−1 b,

(4)

where θ0 ∈ Rn is P
arbitrary. AssumeP
that (i) the step-size
∞
∞
sequence satisfies k=0 αk = ∞, k=0 αk2 < ∞, (ii)
r(F ) ≤ 1, (iii) (φk ) are uniformly
 bounded
 i.i.d. random
variables, and that (iv) C = E φk φ>
is non-singular.
k
Then the parameter vector θk converges with probability
one to (I − γF > )−1 b.

= θk + αk (b> φk − θk> Gφk )φk

Here sk is defined by the last equation.
(3)

assuming that the inverse exists. Note that this expression
for the fixed point does not depend on µ, as promised.
If I − γF > is nonsingular, then there might be no fixed
point. This could happen for example if F were an expansion, or more generally if the limit (γF )∞ were not
zero. These cases correspond to world models that say the
feature vectors diverge to infinity over time. Failure to converge in these cases should not be considered a problem for
the Dyna iterations as planning algorithms; these are cases
in which the planning problem is ill posed. If the feature
vectors diverge, then so too may the rewards, in which case
the true values given the model are infinite. No real finite
Markov decision process could behave in this way.
It remains to show the conditions on F under which the iterations converge to the fixed point if one exists. We prove
next that under the TD(0) iteration (1), convergence is guaranteed if the numerical radius of F is less than one,2 and
1

θk+1 = θk + αk (b> φk + γθk> F φk − θk> φk )φk ,

= b + γF > θ − θ

which immediately implies that
θ

Theorem 3.1 (Convergence of linear TD(0) Dyna for policy evaluation). Consider the TD(0) iteration with a nonnegative step-size sequence (αk ):

Proof. The idea of the proof is to view the algorithm as a
stochastic gradient descent method. In particular, we apply
Proposition 4.1 of (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis 1996).

>

=

then that under the residual-gradient iteration (2), convergence is guaranteed for any F as long as the fixed point exists. That F ’s numerical radius be less than 1 is a stronger
condition than nonsingularity of I − γF > , but it is similar
in that both conditions pertain to the matrix trending toward
expansion when multiplied by itself.

The model is deterministic because it generates the expectation of the next feature vector; the system itself may be stochastic.
2
The numerical radius of a real-valued square matrix A is defined by r(A) = maxkxk2 =1 xT Ax.

The cited proposition requires the definition of a potential function J(θ) and will allow us to conclude that
limk→∞ ∇J(θk) = 0 with probability one. Let
 us choose
J(θ) = 1/2 E (b> φk + γθ> F φk − θ> φk )2 . Note that
by our i.i.d. assumptions on the features, J(θ) is welldefined. We need to check four conditions (because the
step-size conditions are automatically satisfied): (i) The
nonnegativity of the potential function; (ii) The Lipschitz
continuity of ∇J(θ); (iii) The pseudo-gradient property of
the expected update direction; and (iv) The boundedness of
the expected magnitude of the update, more precisely that
E ksk k22 |θk ≤ O(k∇J(θk )k22 ). Nonnegativity is satisfied
by definition and the boundedness condition (iv) is satisfied
thanks to the boundedness of the features.
Let us show now that the pseudo-gradient property (iii) is
satisfied. This condition requires the demonstration of a
positive constant c such that
ck∇J(θk )k22 ≤ −∇J(θk )> E [sk |θk ] .

(5)

Define sk = E [sk |θk ] = Cb − CG> θk . A simple calculation gives ∇J(θk ) = −Gsk . Hence k∇J(θk )k22 =
>
>
>
s>
k G Gsk and −(∇J(θk )) sk = sk Gsk . Therefore (5)
> >
>
is equivalent to c sk G Gsk ≤ sk Gsk . In order to make
this true with a sufficiently small c, it suffices to show that

s> Gs > 0 holds for any non-zero vector s. An elementary
reasoning shows that this is equivalent to 1/2(G + G> ) being positive definite, which in turn is equivalent to r(F ) ≤
1, showing that (iii) is satisfied.
Hence, we have verified all the assumptions of the
cited proposition and can therefore we conclude that
limk→∞ ∇J(θk ) = 0 with probability one. Plugging in the
expression of ∇J(θk ), we get limt→∞ (Cb−CG> θk ) = 0.
Because C and G are invertible (this latter follows from
r(F ) ≤ 1), it follows that the limit of θk exists and
limk→∞ θk = (G> )−1 b = (I − γF > )−1 b.

verges with probability one to (I − γF > )−1 b, assuming
that (I − γF > ) is non-singular.
Proof. As all the conditions of Proposition 4.1 of (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis 1996) are trivially satisfied with the
choice J(θ) = E [J(θ, φk )], we can conclude that θk converges w.p.1 to the minimizer of J(θ). In the previous theorem we have seen that the minimizer of J(θ) is indeed
θ = (I − γF > )−1 b, finishing the proof.
3.2

Convergence to the LSTD solution

Several extensions of this result are possible. First, the requirement of i.i.d. sampling can be considerably relaxed.
With an essentially unchanged proof, it is possible to show
that the theorem remains true if the feature vectors are generated by a Markov process given that they satisfy appropriate ergodicity conditions. Moreover, building on a result by Delyon (1996), one can show that the result continues to hold even if the sequence of features is generated in an algorithmic manner, again provided that some
ergodicity conditions are met.
PKThe major assumption then
is that C = limK→∞ 1/K k=1 φk φ>
k exists and is nonsingular. Further, because there is no “noise” to reject, there
is noP
need to decay the step-sizes towards zero (the condi∞
tion k=0 αk2 < +∞ in the proofs is used to “filter out
noise”). In particular, we conjecture that sufficiently small
constant step-sizes would work as well (for a result of this
type see Proposition 3.4 by Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis 1996).

So far we have discussed the convergence of planning given
a model, but we have said nothing about the relationship
of the model to data, or about the quality of the resultant
solution. Suppose the model were the best linear fit to a
finite dataset of observed feature-vector-to-feature-vector
transitions with accompanying rewards. In this case we can
show that the fixed point of the Dyna updates is the least
squares temporal-difference solution. This is the solution
for which the mean TD(0) update is zero and is also the solution found by the LSTD(0) algorithm (Barto & Bradtke
1996).

On the other hand the requirement on the numerical radius of F seems to be necessary for the convergence of the
TD(0) iteration. By studying the ODE associated with (4),
we see that it is stable if and only if CG is a positive stable
matrix (i.e., iff all its eigenvalues have positive real part).
From this it seems necessary to require that G is positive
stable. However, to ensure that CG is positive stable the
strictly stronger condition that G + G> is positive definite must be satisfied. This latter condition is equivalent
to r(F ) ≤ 1.

Proof. It suffices to show that the respective solution sets
of the equations

We turn now to consider the convergence of Dyna planning
using the residual-gradient Dyna iteration (2). This update
rule can be derived by taking the gradient of J(θ, φk ) =
(b> φk + γθ> φk − θ> φk )2 w.r.t. θ. Thus, as an immediate
consequence of Proposition 4.1 of (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis
1996) we get the following result:
Theorem 3.2 (Convergence of residual-gradient Dyna for
policy evaluation). Assume that θk is updated according to
θk+1 = θk + αk (b> φk + γθk> F φk − θk> φk )(φk − γF φk ),
where θ0 ∈ Rn is arbitrary. Assume that the non-negative
step-size sequence (αk ) satisfies the summability condition
(i) of Theorem 3.1 and that (φk ) are uniformly bounded
i.i.d. random variables. Then the parameter vector θk con-

Theorem 3.3. Given a training dataset of feature, reward,
next-state feature triples D = [φ1 , r1 , φ01 , . . . , φn , rn , φ0n ],
let F, bPbe the least-squares model built on D. Assume that
n
C = k=1 φk φ>
k has full rank. Then the solution (3) is
the same as the LSTD solution on this training set.

0

=

n
X

φk (rk + γ(φ0k )> θ − φ>
k θ),

(6)

k=1

0

=

b + (γF > − I)θ

(7)

are the same. This is because the LSTD parameter vectors
are obtained by solving the first equation and the TD(0)
Dyna solutions are derived from the second equation.
Pn
Pn
Let D = k=1 φk (φ0k )> , and r = k=1 φk rk . A standard calculation shows that
F>

=

C −1 D

and b = C −1 r.

Plugging in C, D into (6) and factoring out θ shows that
any solution of (6) also satisfies
0

=

r + (γD − C) θ.

(8)

If we multiply both sides of (8) by C −1 from the left we
get (7). Hence any solution of (6) is also a solution of (7).
Because all the steps of the above derivation are reversible,
we get that the reverse statement holds as well.

Algorithm 2 : Linear Dyna with PWMA prioritized
sweeping (policy evaluation)
Obtain initial φ, θ, F, b
For each time step:
Take action a according to the policy. Receive r, φ0
δ ← r + γθ> φ0 − θ> φ
θ ← θ + αδφ
F ← F + α(φ0 − F φ)φ>
b ← b + α(r − b> φ)φ
For all i such that φ(i) 6= 0:
For all j such that F ij 6= 0:
Put j on the PQueue with priority |F ij δφ(i)|
Repeat p times while PQueue is not empty:
i ← pop the PQueue
δ ← b(i) + γθ> F ei − θ(i)
θ(i) ← θ(i) + αδ
For all j such that F ij 6= 0:
Put j on the queue with priority |F ij δ|
φ ← φ0

4

Algorithm 3 : Linear Dyna with MG prioritized sweeping
(policy evaluation)
Obtain initial φ, θ, F, b
For each time step:
Take action a according to the policy. Receive r, φ0
δ ← r + γθ> φ0 − θ> φ
θ ← θ + αδφ
F ← F + α(φ0 − F φ)φ>
b ← b + α(r − b> φ)φ
For all i such that φ(i) 6= 0:
Put i on the PQueue with priority |δφ(i)|
Repeat p times while PQueue is not empty:
i ← pop the PQueue
For all j such that F ij 6= 0:
δ ← b(j) + γθ> F ej − θ(j)
θ(j) ← θ(j) + αδ
Put j on the PQueue with priority |δ|
φ ← φ0

Linear prioritized sweeping

We have shown that the convergence and fixed point of policy evaluation by linear Dyna are not affected by the way
the starting feature vectors are chosen. This opens the possibility of selecting them cleverly so as to speed the convergence of the planning process. One natural idea—the
idea behind prioritized sweeping—is to work backwards
from states that have changed in value to the states that
lead into them. The lead-in states are given priority for being updated because an update there is likely to change the
state’s value (because they lead to a state that has changed
in value). If a lead-in state is updated and its value is
changed, then its lead-in states are in turn given priority
for updating, and so on. In the table-lookup context in
which this idea was developed (Moore & Atkeson 1993;
Peng 1993; see also Wingate & Seppi 2005), there could
be many states preceding each changed state, but only one
could be updated at a time. The states waiting to be updated were kept in a queue, prioritized by the size of their
likely effect on the value function. As high-priority states
were popped off the queue and updated, it would sometimes give rise to highly efficient sweeps of updates across
the state space; this is what gave rise to the name “prioritized sweeping”.
With function approximation it is not possible to identify
and work backwards from individual states, but alternatively one could work backwards feature by feature. If
there has just been a large change in θ(i), the component of
the parameter vector corresponding to the ith feature, then
one can look backwards through the model to find the features j whose components θ(j) are likely to have changed
as a result. These are the features j for which the elements
F ij of F are large. One can then preferentially construct

starting feature vectors φ that have non-zero entries at these
j components. In our algorithms we choose the starting
vectors to be the unit basis vectors ej , all of whose components are zero except the jth, which is 1. (Our theoretical
results assure us that this cannot affect the result of convergence.) Using unit basis vectors is very efficient computationally, as the vector matrix multiplication F φ is reduced
to pulling out a single column of F .
There are two tabular prioritized sweeping algorithms in
the literature. The first, due simultaneously to Peng and
Williams (1993) and to Moore and Atkeson (1993), which
we call PWMA prioritized sweeping, adds the predecessors
of every state encountered in real experience to the priority queue whether or not the value of the encountered state
was significantly changed. The second form of prioritized
sweeping, due to McMahan and Gordon (2005), and which
we call MG prioritized sweeping, puts each encountered
state on the queue, but not its predecessors. For McMahan and Gordon this resulted in a more efficient planner.
A complete specification of our feature-by-feature versions
of these two forms of prioritized sweeping are given above,
with TD(0) updates and gradient-descent model learning,
as Algorithms 2 and 3. These algorithms differ slightly
from previous prioritized sweeping algorithms in that they
update the value function from the real experiences and not
just from model-generated experience. With function approximation, real experience is always more informative
than model-generated experience, which will be distorted
by the function approximator. We found this to be a significant effect in our empirical experiments (Section 6).

Algorithm 4: Linear Dyna with MG prioritized sweeping
and TD(0) updates (control)
Obtain initial φ, θ, F, b
For each time step:

>
a ← arg maxa b>
(or -greedy)
a φ + γθ Fa φ
Take action a, receive r, φ0
δ ← r + γθ> φ0 − θ> φ
θ ← θ + αδφ
Fa ← Fa + α(φ0 − Fa φ)φ>
ba ← ba + α(r − b>
a φ)φ
For all i such that φ(i) 6= 0:
Put i on the PQueue with priority |δφ(i)|
Repeat p times while PQueue is not empty:
i ← pop the PQueue
ij
For all j s.t. there
 exists an>a s.t. F
 a 6= 0:
δ ← maxa ba (j) + γθ Fa ej − θ(j)
θ(j) ← θ(j) + αδ
Put j on the PQueue with priority |δ|
φ ← φ0

5

Theory for Control

We now turn to the full case of control, in which separate
models Fa , ba are learned and are then available for each
action a. These are constructed such that Fa φ and b>
a φ can
be used as estimates of the feature vector and reward that
follow φ if action a is taken. A linear Dyna algorithm for
the control case goes through a sequence of planning steps
on each of which a starting feature vector φ and an action
a are chosen, and then a next feature vector φ0 = Fa φ and
next reward r = ba φ are generated from the model. Given
this imaginary experience, a conventional model-free update is performed. The simplest case is to again apply
(1). A complete algorithm including prioritized sweeping
is given in Algorithm 4.
The theory for the control case is less clear than for policy evaluation. The main issue is the stability of the “mixture” of the forward model matrices. The corollary below
is stated for an i.i.d. sequence of features, but by the remark after Theorem 3.1 it can be readily extended to the
case where the policy to be evaluated is used to generate
the trajectories.
Corollary 5.1 (Convergence of linear TD(0) Dyna with
action models). Consider the Dyna recursion (4) with
the modification that in each step, instead of F φk ,
we use Fπ(φk ) φk , where π is a policy mapping feature vectors to actions and {Fa } is a collection of
forward-model matrices. Similarly, b> φk is replaced by
b>
π(φk ) φk . As before, assume that φk is an unspecified
i.i.d. process. Let (F, b)
 be the least squares
 model of
π: F = harg minG E kGφk − iFπ(φk ) φk k22 and b =
2
arg minu E (u> φk − b>
If the numerical radius
π(φk ) φk )
of F is bounded by one, then the conclusions of Theo-

-3

N

1
0
.
.
0
0

-3

N-1

-3

-3

.75
.25
.
.
0
0

-3

3

0
0
.
.
.5
.5

-3

-3

2

0
0
.
.
.25
.75

-2

1

0
0
.
.
0
1

0

0

0
0
.
.
0
0

Figure 1: The general Boyan Chain problem.
rem 3.1 hold: the parameter vector θk converges with probability one to (I − γF > )−1 b.
Proof. The proof is immediate
from
equation

 the normal


for F , which states that E F φk φ>
= E Fπ(φk ) φk φ>
k
k ,
and once we observe that, in the proof of Theorem 3.1, F
appears only in expressions of the form E F φk φ>
k .
As in the case of policy evaluation, there is a corresponding
corollary for the residual gradient iteration, with an immediate proof. These corollaries say that, for any policy with a
corresponding model that is stable, the Dyna recursion can
be used to compute its value function. Thus we can perform a form of policy iteration—continually computing an
approximation to the value function for the greedy policy.

6

Empirical results

In this section we illustrate the empirical behavior of the
four Dyna algorithms and make comparisons to model-free
methods using variations of two standard test problems:
Boyan Chain and Mountain Car. Our Boyan Chain environment is an extension of that by Boyan (1999, 2002)
from 13 to 98 states, and from 4 to 25 features (Geramifard, Bowling & Sutton 2006). Figure 1 depicts this environment in the general form. Each episode starts at state
N = 98 and terminates in state 0. For all states s > 2,
there is an equal probability of transitioning to states s − 1
or s − 2 with a reward of −3. From states 2 and 1, there are
deterministic transitions to states 1 and 0 with respective
rewards of −2 and 0. Our Mountain Car environment is exactly as described by Sutton (1996; Sutton & Barto 1998),
re-implemented in Matlab. An underpowered car must be
driven to the top of a hill by rocking back and forth in a
valley. The state variables are a pair (position,velocity) initialized to (−0.5, 0.0) at the beginning of each episode. The
reward is −1 per time step. There are three discrete actions
(accelerate, reverse, and coast). We used a value function
representation based on tile-coding feature vectors exactly
as in Sutton’s (1996) experiments, with 10 tilings over the
combined (position, velocity) pair, and with the tiles hashed
down to 10,000 features. In the policy evaluation experiments with this domain, the policy was to accelerate in

4

2

Boyan chain

10

9

Mountain Car

x 10

Dyna-Random
TD

7

1

Loss

Dyna-Random
Dyna-PWMA

Loss

10

5

TD

0

10

Dyna-MG

Dyna-PWMA

3

Dyna-MG
−1

10

0

20

40

60
Episode

80

100

1
0

200

400

600
Episode

800

1000

Figure 2: Performance of policy evaluation methods on the Boyan Chain and Mountain Car environments
the direction of the current velocity, and we added noise to
the domain that switched the selected action to a random
action with 10% probability. Complete code for our test
problems as standard RL-Glue environments is available
from the RL-Library hosted at the University of Alberta.
In all experiments, the step size parameter α took the form
0 +1
αt = α0 NN0 +t
1.1 , in which t is the episode number and
the pair (N0 , α0 ) was selected based on empirically finding the best combination out of α0 ∈ {.01, .1, 1} and
N0 ∈ {100, 1000, 106 } separately for each algorithm and
domain. All methods observed the same trajectories in policy evaluation. All graphs are averages of 30 runs; error
bars indicate standard errors in the means. Other parameter
settings were  = 0.1, γ = 1, and λ = 0.
We performed policy evaluation experiments with four algorithms: Dyna-Random, Dyna-PWMA, Dyna-MG (as in
Algorithms 1–3), and model-free TD(0). In the case of
the Dyna-Random algorithm, the starting feature vectors
in planning were chosen to be unit basis vectors with the 1
in a random location. Figure 2 shows the policy evaluation
performance of the four methods in the Boyan Chain and
Mountain Car environments. For the Boyan Chain domain,
the loss was the root-mean-squared error of the learned
value function compared to the exact analytical value, averaged over all states. In the Mountain Car domain, the
states are visited very non-uniformly, and a more sophisticated measure is needed. Note that all of the methods
drive θ toward an asymptotic value in which the expected
TD(0) update is zero; we can use the distance from this
as a loss measure. Specifically, we evaluated each learned
value function by freezing it and then running a fixed set
of 200,000 episodes with it while running the TD(0) algorithm (but not allowing θ to actually change). The norm of
the sum of the (attempted) update vectors was then computed and used as the loss. In practice, this measure can be
computed very efficiently as ||A∗ θ − b∗ || (in the notation of

LSTD(0), see Bradtke & Barto 1996).
In the Boyan Chain environment, the Dyna algorithms generally learned more rapidly than model-free TD(0). DynaMG was initially slower than the other algorithms, then
caught up and surpassed them. The relatively poor early
performance of Dyna-MG was actually due to its being
a better planning method. After few episodes the model
tends to be of very high variance, and so therefore is the
best value-function estimate given it. We tested this hypothesis by running the Dyna methods starting with a fixed,
well-learned model; in this case Dyna-MG was the best of
all the methods from the beginning. All of these data are
for one step of planning for each real step of interaction
with the world (p = 1). In preliminary experiments with
larger values of p, up to p = 10, we found further improvements in learning rate of the Dyna algorithms over TD(0),
and again Dyna-MG was best.
The results for Mountain Car are less clear. Dyna-MG
quickly does significantly better than TD(0), but the other
Dyna algorithms lag initially and never surpass TD(0).
Note that, for any value of p, Dyna-MG does many more θ
updates than the other two Dyna algorithms (because these
updates are in an inner loop, cf. Algorithms 2 and 3). Even
so, because of its other efficiencies Dyna-MG tended to run
faster overall in our implementation. Obviously, there is a
lot more interesting empirical work that could be done here.
We performed one Mountain Car experiment with DynaMG as a control algorithm (Algorithm 4), comparing it
with model-free Sarsa (i.e., Algorithm 4 with p = 0). The
results are shown in Figure 3. As before, Dyna-MG showed
a distinct advantage over the model-free method in terms
of learning rate. There was no clear advantage for either
method in the second half of the experiment. We note
that, asymptotically, model-free methods are never worse
than model-based methods, and are often better because the
model does not converge exactly to the true system because

7

−120
−140

Return

−160

Dyna-MG

−180
−200

Sarsa
−220
−240
−260
0

20

40

60
Episode

80

100

Figure 3: Control performance on Mountain Car

Conclusion

In this paper we have taken important steps toward establishing the theoretical and algorithmic foundations of
Dyna-style planning with linear function approximation.
We have established that Dyna-style planning with familiar
reinforcement learning update rules converges under weak
conditions corresponding roughly, in some cases, to the existence of a finite solution to the planning problem, and
that convergence is to a unique least-squares solution independent of the distribution used to generate hypothetical experience. These results make possible our second
main contribution: the introduction of algorithms that extend prioritized sweeping to linear function approximation,
with correctness guarantees. Our empirical results illustrate
the use of these algorithms and their potential for accelerating reinforcement learning. Overall, our results support
the conclusion that Dyna-style planning may be a practical
and competitive approach to achieving rapid, online control
in stochastic sequential decision problems with large state
spaces.
Acknowledgements

of structural modeling assumptions. (The case we treat
here—linear models and value functions with one-step TD
methods—is a rare case in which asymptotic performance
of model-based and model-free methods should be identical.) The benefit of models, and of planning generally, is in
rapid adaptation to new problems and situations.

The authors gratefully acknowledge the substantial contributions of Cosmin Paduraru and Mark Ring to the early
stages of this work. This research was supported by
iCORE, NSERC and Alberta Ingenuity.

These empirical results are not extensive and in some cases
are preliminary, but they nevertheless illustrate some of the
potential of linear Dyna methods. The results on the Boyan
Chain domain show that Dyna-style planning can result in
a significant improvement in learning speed over modelfree methods. In addition, we can see trends that have been
observed in the tabular case re-occurring here with linear
function approximation. In particular, prioritized sweeping can result in more efficient learning than simply updating features at random, and the MG version of prioritized
sweeping seems to be better than the PWMA version.

Atkeson, C. (1993). Using local trajectory optimizers to
speed up global optimization in dynamic programming.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 5,
663–670.
Baird, L. C. (1995). Residual algorithms: Reinforcement
learning with function approximation. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 30–37.
Bertsekas, Dimitri P., Tsitsiklis. J. (1996). Neuro-Dynamic
Programming. Athena Scientific, 1996.
Boutilier, C., Dearden, R., Goldszmidt, M. (2000).
Stochastic dynamic programming with factored representations. Artificial Intelligence 121: 49–107.
Bowling, M., Geramifard, A., Wingate, D. (2008). Sigma
point policy iteration. In Proceedings of the Seventh
International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems.
Boyan, J. A. (1999). Least-squares temporal difference
learning. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth International
Conference on Machine Learning, 49–56.
Boyan, J. A. (2002). Technical update: Least-squares temporal difference learning. Machine Learning, 49:233–
246.
Bradtke, S., Barto, A. G. (1996). Linear least-squares al-

Finally, we would like to note that we have done extensive experimental work (not reported here) attempting to
adapt least squares methods such as LSTD to online control domains, in particular to the Mountain Car problem. A
major difficulty with these methods is that they place equal
weight on all past data whereas, in a control setting, the policy changes and older data becomes less relevant and may
even be misleading. Although we have tried a variety of
forgetting strategies, it is not easy to obtain online control
performance with these methods that is superior to modelfree methods. One reason we consider the Dyna approach
to be promising is that no special changes are required for
this case; it seems to adapt much more naturally and effectively to the online control setting.

References

gorithms for temporal difference learning. Machine
Learning, 22:33-57.
Degris, T., Sigaud, O., Wuillemin, P. (2006). Learning
the structure of factored markov decision processes in
reinforcement learning problems. Proceedings of the
23rd International Conference on Machine Learning.
Delyon, B. (1996). General results on the convergence of
stochastic algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, 41:1245–1255.
Geramifard, A., Bowling, M., Sutton, R. S. (2006). Incremental least-square temporal difference learning. Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 356-361.
Kuvayev, L., Sutton, R. S. (1996). Model-based reinforcement learning with an approximate, learned model.
Proceedings of the Ninth Yale Workshop on Adaptive
and Learning Systems, pp. 101–105, Yale University,
New Haven, CT.
Lagoudakis, M., Parr, R. (2003). Least squares policy iteration. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 4:11071149.
McMahan H. B., Gordon G. J. (2005). Fast exact planning
in Markov decision processes. Proceedings of the 15th
International Conference on Automated Planning and
Scheduling.
Moore, A. W., Atkeson, C. G. (1993). Prioritized sweeping: Reinforcement learning with less data and less real
time. Machine Learning, 13:103–130.
Paduraru, C. (2007). Planning with Approximate and
Learned Models of Markov Decision Processes. MSc
thesis, Department of Computing Science, University
of Alberta.
Peng, J., Williams, R.J. (1993). Efficient learning and planning within the Dyna framework, Adaptive Behavior 1,
437–454.
Peters, J., Vijayakumar, S. and Schaal, S. (2005). Natural
actor-critic. Proceedings of the 16th European Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 280-291.
Schaeffer, J., Hlynka, M., Jussila, V. (2001). Temporal difference learning applied to a high-performance
game-playing program. Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp.
529-534.
Silver, D., Sutton, R. S., Müller, M. (2007). Reinforcement
learning of local shape in the game of Go. Proceedings
of the 20th International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, pp. 1053–1058.
Singh, S. P. (1992). Reinforcement learning with a hierarchy of abstract models. Proceedings of the Tenth
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 202–
207.
Sutton, R. S. (1988). Learning to predict by the method of
temporal differences. Machine Learning, 3:9–44.

Sutton, R. S. (1990). Integrated architectures for learning, planning, and reacting based on approximating dynamic programming, Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 216–
224.
Sutton, R. S. (1996). Generalization in reinforcement
learning: Successful examples using sparse coarse coding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems: Proceedings of the 1995 Conference, pp. 1038–
1044. MIT Press.
Sutton, R. S., Barto, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press.
Wingate, D., Seppi, K. D. (2005). Prioritization methods for accelerating MDP solvers. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 6: 851–881.

