Stanford University
jduchi@cs.stanford.edu

Daphne Koller
Computer Science Dept.
Stanford University
koller@cs.stanford.edu

likelihood, often with additional parameter priors (regularization penalties). These objectives cannot be optimized in
closed form, but they are convex, and so the global optimum can be found using iterative methods, such as simple
gradient descent or more sophisticated optimization algorithms (Minka, 2001; Vishwanathan et al., 2006). Unfortunately, each step of these optimization algorithms requires
that we compute the log partition function and the gradient
which in turn requires performing inference on the model
with the current parameters. As MRF inference is computationally expensive or even intractable, the learning task
— which executes inference repeatedly — is often viewed
as intractable.
One commonly-used approach (Shental et al., 2003; Taskar
et al., 2002; Sutton & McCallum, 2005) is to approximate the gradient of the maximum likelihood objective
through an approximate inference technique, most often
the loopy belief propagation (LBP) (Pearl, 1988; Yedidia
et al., 2005) algorithm. LBP uses message passing to find
fixed points of the non-convex Bethe approximation to the
energy functional (Yedidia et al., 2005). Unfortunately, for
some choices of models, LBP can be highly non-robust,
providing wrong answers or not converging at all. These
phenomena are particularly problematic when LBP is used
as the inner loop of a learning algorithm, as they can lead
to non-robust estimates of the gradient, and poor convergence of the entire algorithm. Other methods, such as the
double loop algorithm of Yuille (2002), provide a convergent alternative to optimizing the Bethe objective. However, in the context of learning, this method would give rise
to a triple-loop algorithm (with parameter updates being
the outer loop), with the resulting increase in complexity.
Moreover, as the inner objective is non-convex, it has multiple local minima, possibly creating problems for the more
sophisticated optimizers that often assume convexity.
In this paper, we present an alternative approach, based
on a unified objective that integrates both inference and
learning. Our formulation starts with the dual of maximum likelihood, namely maximum entropy with expectation constraints. We approximate the entropy using the
Bethe approximation and the marginal polytope with the

standard local consistency constraints. This formulation
pulls all of the non-convexity into the external, unified
objective, avoiding the difficulty of solving a non-convex
problem in the inner loop. The overall objective, which
we call CAMEL (Constrained Approximate Maximum Entropy Learning) is a sum of concave and convex functions.
We maximize it using the iterated CCCP approach of Yuille
(2002): in each iteration, we linearize the non-concave part,
resulting in a constrained maximization of a concave function problem. We show how the dual of this problem can be
reformulated as a sum of local logistic regressions, one for
each factor in the MRF, with shared parameters. The optimization can thus be performed efficiently using state-ofthe-art solvers such as conjugate gradient or L-BFGS (Zhu
et al., 1997).
The unified objective provides an elegant framework to understand different approaches in terms of the approximations they make to both the objective and the constraints.
In particular, we show that piecewise training method, recently proposed by Sutton and McCallum (2005), is solving a simplification of the CAMEL objective, when the
linearization is chosen to be zero, and the marginal consistency constraints have been dropped. This provides a
novel insight into the relationship between LBP and piecewise training, providing a direct comparison between the
objectives that each is optimizing. We also show that the
Uniform Propagation and Scaling algorithm of Teh and
Welling (2001) is performing a coordinate-ascent procedure on the unified objective for a restricted class of models
that involve no weight sharing, conditional training or regularization.
On several data sets, we find that our CCCP-based procedure has to perform relatively few relinearizations. On
tasks where LBP works well in the inner loop, we show
that our method achieves comparable results. On a vision
task, where LBP fails completely, our method still performs
well, and outperforms piecewise training by a large margin.

2
2.1

Background and Related Work
Maximum Entropy Learning

For the purposes of this paper, we focus on discrete MRFs,
and utilize the log-linear representation, which most naturally accommodates rich feature spaces, regularization, and
parameter sharing. A log-linear MRF encodes a joint distribution over assignments x to a set of (discrete) random
variables X = {X1 , . . . , Xn }. We assume that the distribution is defined in terms of a set of features fl , each
with its own weight wl . In our formulation, features can
be shared both within and between factors in the network.
We define f l to be the overall sufficient statistic associated
with fl . For standard (generative) MRFs, the distribution

defined by the log-linear model is:
1
1 Y
exp (wl f l (x)) = exp(wT f (x)),
Pw (x) =
Z
Z
l
(1)
where Z is the normalizing partition function.
Given a training set D with instances x1 , . . . , xM , we can
choose the parameters w to maximize the log-likelihood
PM
log P (D | w) = m=1 log P (xm | w). This objective
has no closed form solution, but it is convex, and so can be
optimized using simple gradient descent, or more sophisticated optimization techniques such as conjugate gradient
or L-BFGS (Zhu et al., 1997).
It is well-known that the dual of maximum likelihood is
maximum entropy (Berger et al., 1996), subject to moment
matching constraints on the expectations of features taken
with respect to the distribution.
maximizeQ
subject to

HQ (X)
EQ [f ] = EP̂ [f ]
P
x Q(x) = 1
Q(x) ≥ 0

(2)

This derivation also generalizes to the case of optimizing
a conditional-likelihood objective, as in conditional random fields (CRFs) (Lafferty et al., 2001). Here, we encode
a conditional probability distribution over a set of variables Y given
Q an observed set of variables X: Pw (y |
1
x) = Z(x)
l exp(wl fl (y l , xl )), where Z(x) is a normalizing constant that defines a distribution over y for every value of x. The learning task for a CRF is to maximize the
P conditional likelihood of the training data D,
maxw (xm ,ym )∈D log Pw (y m | xm ). The dual of this
problem is the sum of the entropies of the conditional distributions, subject to expectation constraints (McCallum
et al., 2000):
P
maximizeQ Pm HQ (Y | xm )
P
subject to Pm EQY |xm [f (Y , xm )] = m f (y m , xm )
y QY |xm (y) = 1, ∀m
Q(y | xm ) ≥ 0, ∀m, y
(3)
We can also generalize this formulation to encompass regularization of parameters (or, equivalently, a parameter
prior). For example, regularizing the L2 norm of the
weights w corresponds to replacing the hard constraints
equating the expected and empirical counts with an L2
penalty on their difference in the objective:
P
maximizeQ Pm HQ (Y | xm ) − λkEQ [f ] − EP̂ [f ]k2
subject to
y QY |xm (y) = 1, ∀m
Q(y | xm ) ≥ 0, ∀m, y
(4)
For simplicity of exposition and without loss of generality,
we present our derivation for the case of generative training
without regularization.

2.2

Constrained Entropy Approximation

Unfortunately, the entropy-based optimization problems
presented above are no more tractable than their maximum
likelihood dual, as they require that we optimize over the
space of distributions Q, whose dimension is exponentially
large. A tractable approximation to this problem can be obtained by applying the same sequence of transformations
used by Yedidia et al. (2005) to derive the LBP messagepassing inference algorithm as a fixed point to the problem of optimizing objective. More precisely, we consider
a cluster graph consisting of a set of clusters {Ci }, where
each has a scope ci ⊂ {X1 , . . . , Xn }. Pairs of clusters
are connected by edges (Ci , Cj ), annotated with sepsets
sij ⊆ ci ∩ cj .
Now, rather than optimizing over the space of distributions
Q, we optimize over the set of pseudo-marginals — a set
π = {πi (ci ) : Ci ∈ C}, µ = {µij (sij ) : (Ci , Cj ) ∈ C},
subject to local (cluster-based) calibration and normalization constraints:
P
µ (s ) =
ci \sij πi (ci ) ∀(Ci , Cj ) ∈ C
P ij ij
(5)
π
(c
)
=
1
∀Ci ∈ C.
ci i i

The local marginal consistency constraints are a relaxation (outer bound) on the marginal polytope (Wainwright
et al., 2003) — the set of all π, µ that can be obtained
by marginalizing out a legal distribution Q(X1 , . . . , Xn ).
That is, whereas all legal marginals satisfy the constraints
of Eq. (5), there are assignments π, µ that satisfy these constraints but are not the marginals of any legal distribution.
Continuing as in the LBP derivation, we approximate the
entropy HQ (X) as:
X
X
HQ (X) ≈
Hπi (Ci ) −
(6)
Hµij (Sij )
Ci ∈C

Sij ∈C

This reformulation is exact when the cluster graph is a tree,
but is approximate otherwise. We note that one can also use
other approximations to the entropy that are concave, e.g.,
those proposed by Wainwright et al. (2003), Weiss et al.
(2007). We focus our discussion mostly on the Bethe approximation, which often provides a better approximation,
if it converges.
Putting these approximations together, we obtain the
following CAMEL objective (Constrained Approximate
Maximum-Entropy Learning):
P
P
P
maximizeπ
i H(πi ) −
ij H(
ci \sij πi (ci ))
subject to (a)EP
π [f ] = EP̂ [f ]
P
(b) ci \sij πi (ci ) = cj \sij πj (cj )
P
(c) ci πi (ci ) = 1
π≥0
(7)
To illustrate this equation, consider a simple MRF over the
binary variables A, B, C, with three clusters AB, BC, AC.

We assume that the log-linear model is defined by the following two features, both of which are shared over all clusters: f00 (x, y) = 1 if x = 0 and y = 0, and 0 otherwise;
and f11 (x, y) = 1 if x = 1 and y = 1. Assume we have 3
data instances [0, 0, 1], [0, 1, 0], [1, 0, 0]. The unnormalized
empirical counts of each feature, pooled over all clusters,
is then EP̂ [f00 ] = (1 + 1 + 1)/3 = 1, EP̂ [f11 ] = 0. In this
case Eq. (7) would take the following form:
maximizeπ
subject to

2.3

H(πAB ) + H(πBC ) + H(πAC )
−H(π
P A ) − H(πB ) − H(πC )
Pi Eπi [f00 ] = 1
=0
Pi Eπi [f11 ] P
[π
]
−
AB
Pa
P c [πBC ] = 0
[π
]
−
BC
b
P
P a [πAC ] = 0
[π
]
−
AC
c
b [πAB ] = 0
P
i = 1, 2, 3
ci πi (ci ) = 1
π≥0

(8)

Related Work

A formulation similar to the CAMEL objective of Eq. (7)
was used by Teh and Welling (2001) to derive Uniform
Propagation and Scaling(Teh & Welling, 2001). They
begin with minimizing the Kullback-Liebler divergence
and then present an approximation motivated by the LBP
derivation. They then use a Lagrange-multiplier analysis to
define the fixed points for their objective, and obtain a unified message passing algorithm. Their formulation, however, is highly restricted in the following ways: (1) it only
covers parametrizations that are full factors over the clusters in the network, without shared parameters; (2) it only
allows moment matching constraints over features involving single variables; (3) it does not cover conditional training; (4) it does not allow for regularization. These assumptions are violated in virtually any practical MRF application. Moreover, their unified message passing algorithm
is based on iterated proportional fitting, and thereby performs coordinate ascent on the Largrange multipliers. This
technique works reasonably well when the constraints tie
together few variables, as in their restricted class of problems. In the general case with shared parameters, coordinate ascent will perform poorly (Minka, 2001) because
iterating one constraint will often cause a large number of
other constraints to be violated.
The unified CAMEL objective was also proposed by Wainwright (2006). However, Wainwright’s optimization approach differs from ours in that he selects a single convex approximation to the entropy, and then uses a standard
double-loop algorithm which optimizes log-likelihood in
the outer loop using a convexified LBP as the inference
engine in the inner loop. By contrast, our approach optimizes the original Bethe approximation, using the iterated
CCCP approach. An analysis of the unified objective is also
used by Wainwright et al. (2003) to show that maximum
likelihood learning with LBP has a simple closed form solution (called pseudo-moment matching), in the very re-

stricted setting of generative MRFs, with full table factors,
no regularization, and no shared parameters. (This solution
is obtained by estimating the cluster beliefs directly as the
marginals of the empirical distribution, and then using a
simple procedure for computing the parameterization from
those marginals.)

with a linear function g T π. This approximation gives rise
to a problem where we maximize a concave function subject to constraints. This problem can be solved efficiently
using standard optimization methods. We now relinearize
the convex component around the solution found, and repeat the process.

Also interesting is the connection between Eq. (7) and
the piecewise training approach of Sutton and McCallum
(2005). If we further relax the optimization problem by
removing the marginal consistency constraints in (b), and
further approximate the objective by eliminating the negative entropy terms on the right-hand side, we obtain the
following optimization problem:

We note that there are several other ways to “carve out”
a concave portion of this objective. In particular, more
elaborate methods can be defined based on the concave entropy approximations of Wainwright et al. (2003), Heskes
(2006), Weiss et al. (2007). These entropy approximations
use counting numbers to define a weighted sum of positive and negative entropies that is guaranteed to be concave
overall. Thus, we might be able to “fold in” a portion of
the negative entropy terms into the positive entropy terms,
while still leaving the sum concave. Here, for simplicity,
we consider the simplest approach, where we take only the
positive entropies to be concave, and (iteratively) linearize
the negative entropies. The analysis of Yuille shows that
this process is guaranteed to converge to a local optimum
of the original objective.

maximizeπ
subject to

Hπi (Ci )
Eπ [f ] = EP̂ [f ]

(9)

This optimization problem is concave, and its dual is precisely the piecewise objective. This equivalence highlights
the two important differences between the objective of
piecewise training and that of maximum likelihood using
LBP inference: piecewise training uses a particular form of
concave entropy approximation, and omits any attempt to
enforce the marginal consistency constraints between clusters. We study the implications of these approximations.

3

Optimization

We now consider the task of optimizing the Eq. (7) objective. The standard strategy is to introduce Lagrange multipliers, or weights, for the expectation constraints. For a
fixed set of weights, the resulting optimization problem is
minimization of the Bethe Free Energy where the potentials are defined by the setting of the weights. The standard
optimization strategy is a double loop method, where the
outer loop takes gradient steps relative to the weights, and
the inner loop computes the gradient using a message passing algorithm such as LBP. As we shall demonstrate in our
experiments, this method can run into significant difficulties in complex models, as having a non-convex problem
as the inner loop of outer optimization creates convergence
problems.
The objective in Eq. (7)
P has two components: the positive clique entropies
i H(πi ), and the negative sepset
P
entropies −H( ci \sij πi (ci )). The positive entropies are
concave functions, whereas the negative entropies are convex. For the Bethe approximation, this objective is not concave, and therefore must be optimized with care. The concave entropy approximations mentioned above can be optimized directly using standard optimization methods.
Our strategy for the non-concave case is based on the
CCCP approach of Yuille (2002), which was developed for
the approximate inference task. We write the objective as a
sum of a concave function and a convex
We then
P function.
P
linearize the convex component − ij H( ci \sij πi (ci ))

In the remainder of this section, we first discuss the inner
loop of this algorithm — the solution of the constrained
convex optimization problem and then present the iterated
linearization procedure. In each iteration, our optimization
problem now takes the following form:
P T
P
maximizeπ
i gi πi
i H(πi ) −
subject to (a)EP
π [f ] = EP̂ [f ]
P
(b) ci \sij πi (ci ) = cj \sij πj (cj )
P
(c) ci πi (ci ) = 1
π≥0
(10)
In this equation, the objective is the sum of entropies of the
cliques, with a linear contribution that does not affect the
form of the optimization.
We want to solve this optimization problem via its dual;
if we ignore the marginal consistency constraints, the dual
would simply be a product of log-linear estimation problems with shared parameters. Appealingly, we can also
accommodate the marginal consistency constraints within
this framework by introducing auxiliary features that capture violations of marginal consistency. In particular, we
arbitrarily select a directionality (i, j) for each edge ij in
the cluster graph, and for each one define a set of features
s
hijij , one for each assignment sij to the sepset; this feature
measures violation of marginal consistency for this particular sepset assignment. The scope of these features is Ci and
Cj . Applied to an assignment ci , it takes the value +1 if ci
agrees with sij ; applied to cj , it takes the value −1 if if cj
agrees with sij . Thus, the overall value of the feature is 0 if
the cliques agree on the assignment sij , and ±1 otherwise.
The expected value of these features is
X
X
s
Eπ [hijij ] =
πi (ci ) −
πj (cj ).
ci \sij

cj \sij

The expected value of these features on the empirical distribution, EP̂ [hij ], is necessarily 0, as all valid distributions
have consistent marginals.
Continuing our running example, here we would have one
set of features for the B sepset that relates the AB and
BC clusters. Let us consider the feature that measures
the disagreement on the B = 0. The feature hB=0
is de12
fined as follows: when applied to AB, it returns 1 whenever B = 0; when applied to BC, it returns -1 whenever
B = 0; in all other cases, its value is 0. Then, the expectation of this feature on the factors will precisely be
πAB (00) + πAB (10) − πBC (00) − πBC (01). As each πi is
constrained to be normalized, the expected value of hB=0
is
12
the degree to which πAB and πBC disagree on P (B = 0).
We can now rewrite Eq. (7) as standard maximum entropy
subject to expectation constraints:
P
P T
maximizeπ
i H(πi ) −
i gi πi
subject to (a)Eπ [f ] = EP̂ [f ]
(b)E
(11)
Pπ [h] = 0
(c) ci πi (ci ) = 1
π0
We compute the Lagrange dual of this problem by introducing two sets of Lagrange multipliers: w for the original
expectation constraints, and δ that correspond to the new
marginal consistency features h. For a cluster assignment
ci to Ci and a feature fl , we define fl (ci ) to be the portion
of the sufficient statistics of fl derived from the Ci portion
of the overall joint assignment to the network variables. We
can now define:
X X s s
1
δijij hijij (ci )+gci )
exp(wT f (ci )+
Zi
s

πi (ci ) =

(i,j)∈C

ij

where Zi is the normalization constant. The dual of
Eq. (11) can now be written as:
" M
#
X X
X
m
maximize
wl fl (ci ) − ln Zi
(12)
w,δ

Ci ∈C

m=1

l

Continuing our 3-cluster example, assuming g = 0, the
dual objective is written as the sum of three terms, one for
each cluster. The term for the AB cluster with our three
data points, would be
w00

3
X

m=1

f00 (am , bm ) + w11

3
X

f11 (am , bm ) − 3 log Z1

m=1

Our overall objective would be the sum of the
three cluster terms, over the parameters w00 , w11 and
1
0
1
0
1
0
. We can then define the potentials
, δ23
, δ23
, δ13
, δ13
, δ12
δ12
using the derived parameters; for example,
P b π1b(A, B) =
exp(w
f
(A,
B)
+
w
f
(A,
B)
+
00
00
11
11
b δ12 h12 (AB) +
P a a
δ
h
(AB)).
a 13 13

We see that Eq. (12) is the sum of local likelihoods, one per
training instance xm and cluster Ci in the cluster graph.
In fact, this objective is very similar to both the piecewise
objective and standard multiclass logistic regression. The
linear term g produces a bias term for each cluster. As in
piecewise training, we obtain a set of log-linear estimation
problems that are coupled via the use of shared parameters. Unlike piecewise training, our formulation enforces
marginal consistency constraints through the use of the Lagrange multiplier δ. We are guaranteed that the factors resulting from this optimization will be a set of consistent
pseudo-marginals. Thus, our learning objective couples inference — obtaining a set of consistent marginals — with
learning.
After fully optimizing the concave subproblem, we update
the linearization as per the CCCP algorithm:
X
X
∂
H(
πi (ci ))
gci :=
∂πi (ci ) ij
ci \sij


X
X
−1 − log(
=
πi (ci ))
i→j

ci \sij

We repeat the procedure of optimizing the concave subproblem and relinearizing until the change in linearization
term g is small. This procedure is guaranteed to converge
to a fixed point of the original objective (Yuille, 2002). We
experimented with initializing g by evaluating the above
expression at π = π̂.
We note that, since at convergence the clusters agree on
their separators, we could also use another linear combination of the marginals of the clusters to define the negative entropy. One reasonable choice is to define the sepset
marginal for each edge as half the marginal of the source
cluster and half of the target cluster, thus splitting the linearization evenly between the two clusters.

4

Experimental Results

The CAMEL objective consists of an objective which is a
sum of a convex and concave entropy approximation and
constraints which include the moment matching and local
marginal consistency. We tested algorithms where we explored dropping the negative entropy terms and dropping
the marginal consistency constraints in order to investigate
the effects independently.
• Piecewise Training (Sutton & McCallum, 2005)
which is equivalent to the CAMEL objective with
the local consistency constraints and negative entropy
terms removed.
• CAMEL(0), which is the CAMEL objective with the
negative entropies removed, which corresponds to
Piecewise Training that respects the marginal consistency constraints. We first run Piecewise, and then

introduce the marginal consistency constraints as we
found this ran more quickly.
• LBP, approximating the gradient using Residual Belief Propagation (Elidan et al., 2006).
We tested
various convergence criteria and show the choice that
worked best. When we change the weights, we restart
inference from the final messages from the previous
setting of which improves the speed and robustness of
the learning algorithm.
• CCCP CAMEL which is the algorithm proposed in the
paper, initialized at g = 0.
• CCCP CAMEL(Empirical), initialized from the empirical distribution as discussed earlier.
All of the objective functions are optimized using a limitedmemory BFGS (Zhu et al., 1997), using the recommended
parameters that come with the standard software package.
At test time, we use RBP for inference.
We test the performance of each algorithm by training conditional random fields on the following three data sets: the
CONLL 2003 English named entity recognition data set,
the CMU Seminar Announcements information extraction
data set, and the COREL image segmentation data set. We
use the Gaussian prior of σ 2 = 10 that was used in previous work for the NLP data sets, and no regularization for
the vision data set, which has a very small number of parameters relative to the number of training instances. For
both NLP tasks, our features were calculated as in Finkel
et al. (2005) and we evaluated our results by calculating
the macro F1 and micro F1 scores.
The CONLL data set1 is a collection of Reuters newswire
articles annotated with four entity types: person, location,
organization, and miscellaneous. The task is to correctly
classify tokens as the correct entity type. We trained on the
standard training set of 947 documents and tested on the
standard test set of 231 documents. The CRF model for this
task is the skip chain model developed by Sutton and McCallum (2004), which is the standard linear-chain model
for information extraction, augmented with long-range dependencies between identical capitalized tokens.
Our second task is to extract information about seminars
from the email announcements data set of Freitag (1998) 2 .
The data is labeled with four fields: Start-Time, End-Time,
Location and Speaker. It consists of 485 emails containing seminar announcements at Carnegie Mellon University.
The CRF model for this task is the skip-chain model developed by Sutton and McCallum (2004). We evaluated the
performance averaged over four folds.
Our final task is an image segmentation task in the Corel
data set. These images are pre-segmented into seven
1
2

Available at http://cnts.uia.ac.be/conll2003/ner/
Available at http://nlp.shef.ac.uk/dot.kom/resources.html

classes: rhino, polar bear, water, snow, vegetation, sky, and
ground. Here, we used a newly developed model (Gould
et al., 2008) constructed as follows: Pixels are first grouped
into a number of super-pixels, using the normalized mincut algorithm of Ren and Malik (2003). Seven (flat)
boosted classifiers were trained to learn the singleton potentials for each patch in terms of its appearance features.
Edge potentials were a full (symmetric) 7 × 7 table. A
CRF was then trained to learn both the edge potentials,
the weights of the pre-learned node potentials, and the bias
term. Thus, in this model, there is a total of 56 (8 × 7) parameters for the node potentials and 21 parameters for the
edge potentials. Our evaluation metric is the accuracy of
the classifier at predicting the class of each super-pixel. We
randomly partitioned the 80 images into three folds of 40
training and 40 test images and averaged the results.
On the named entity recognition task, all of the methods
perform reasonably well. The LBP method and the CCCP
CAMEL method perform the best and almost identically.
The table also presents the running times, but these are
very sensitive to the convergence criteria used for the inner
loop, which affect the different algorithms in unpredictable
way. Thus, these running times should be viewed only as a
very coarse guideline to the orders of magnitude. The number of outer loops of the CCCP algorithms was small each
time, illustrating that a small number of relinearizations is
required to reach convergence.
On the information extraction task, loopy belief propagation performs the best, but the difference between the algorithms is not much larger than the standard deviation of
the estimate. On this data set, after eliminating features
that appear only once, there are 346,140 features, and 3
million weights, and therefore the additional features and
weights added by the CAMEL variants (1 million) are a
small proportion; as a result, the additional running times
for CAMEL(0) over Piecewise is not significant. However,
due to the large number of features, the learned distribution is very similar to the empirical distribution, so that
the marginal consistency constraints are automatically satisfied. Indeed, the CAMEL version that initializes from the
Piecewise Training results converges very quickly.
A LGORITHM
P IECEWISE T RAINING
CAMEL(0)
LBP
CCCP CAMEL
CCCP CAMEL(E MPIR )

T IME ( S )
911(20)
4082(267)
4437(307)
40501(3994)
37032(4419)

ACCURACY (%)
78.6(1.3)
82.9(0.9)
53.2(4.2)
84.4(.6)
84.4(.5)

Table 3: Results for the image segmentation task; results are averaged over 3 folds, with standard deviation in
parens.
On the image segmentation task, the story is quite different.
This data set has only 84 weights, with very extensive sharing across all the clusters. Learning with LBP fails badly,
as the optimizer is incapable of making any progress in op-

A LGORITHM
P IECEWISE T RAINING
CAMEL(0)
LBP
CCCP CAMEL
CCCP CAMEL(E MPIRICAL )

O UTER L OOPS
1
1
3
2
2

I NNER L OOP
82
20
97,20,12
250,41
150,40

T IME ( S )
7348
9348
13871
40000
24833

M ACRO F1
83.7
83.9
84.6
84.6
84.5

M ICRO F1
85.2
85.5
86.2
86.1
85.9

Table 1: Results for the named entity recognition task.
A LGORITHM
P IECEWISE T RAINING
CAMEL(0)
LBP
CCCP CAMEL
CCCP CAMEL(E MPIRICAL )

O UTER L OOPS
0
0
0
2
1

M ACRO F1
88.5(1.0)
88.5(1.0)
89.6(1.1)
88.7(1.1)
88.7(1.1)

M ICRO F1
88.5(.9)
88.5(.9)
89.6(1.0)
88.6(1.0)
88.7(1.0)

Table 2: Results for the information extraction task; results are averaged over 4 folds, with standard deviation in parens.
timizing the objective. We tried to restart the optimizer several times, which we found helped significantly on the NLP
data sets, but this was not effective on the image segmentation data set. This is not surprising because this model has
very many tight loops, which may cause LBP to be highly
unstable. The CAMEL algorithms achieve the best performance on this data set. The large margin between Piecewise and CAMEL illustrates that enforcing the marginal
consistency constraints is beneficial. In addition, the improvement of CCCP CAMEL over CAMEL(0) is also significant, demonstrating that the negative entropy terms are
also important. The CCCP Camel algorithms had essentially converged after seven linearizations on all folds.
A different view of these results can be obtained from the
optimization perspective. In the maximum entropy problem, sharing parameters corresponds to reducing the number of rows of the moment-matching constraint matrix,
thereby reducing its rank. The lower the rank, the less constrained the optimization problem, and thus the more likely
that the distribution will deviate from the marginal polytope. In the NLP data set, this did not occur because there
are more weights than data instances, so that the momentmatching constraint matrix is close to full-rank. Thus, the
additional local-consistency constraints have little effect on
the rank, and therefore do not further constrain the problem
significantly. By contrast, in the vision domain, the graph
has many shared parameters, so that the problem is highly
under-constrained, and it is easy to leave the marginal polytope while still agreeing with the empirical moments. By
adding the many constraints that result from the marginal
consistency constraints in this (fairly dense) graph, we provide important information that moves the solution towards
a more plausible region of the space.

5

Discussion and Conclusions

The main contribution of our paper is a convergent algorithm to perform learning with the Bethe approximation
that only has to solve convex problems in the innermost
loop. As in the work of Teh and Welling (2001), Wain-

wright (2006), we use the entropy-dual of the maximum
likelihood task, and approximate it in ways that parallel
the derivation of the belief propagation algorithm (Yedidia
et al., 2005). However, unlike the formulation of Teh
and Welling, our approach encompasses parameter sharing, regularization, and conditional training, all of which
are ubiquitous in real-world problems. Unlike the work of
Wainwright, our algorithm optimizes the Bethe approximation to the objective, rather than a convex surrogate.
Our optimization algorithm uses an outer loop where we
repeatedly linearize the unified, non-convex objective, and
an inner loop where we optimize the linearized objective.
Our inner loop reformulates the marginal consistency constraints using special features, allowing it to use standard
gradient-based methods to find a set of consistent pseudomarginals. Thus, our inner loop jointly solves a problem
that unifies learning and inference (obtaining a set of consistent marginals). We note that the inner loop can also be
solved using other methods; for example, we can optimize
our convex subproblems by performing maximum likelihood estimation using sufficient statistics computed by a
convex-BP message passing algorithm (Weiss et al., 2007).
The most efficient method is likely to depend on the details of the problem (Minka, 2001), such as the extent to
which parameters are shared across the network. Studying
the relative trade-offs of different scheduling algorithms is
a useful direction for future work.
Our unified objective provides a framework for understanding learning algorithms in terms of the approximations they
make both on the objective and on the constraints. For example, we saw that it allows us to reinterpret the piecewise
training method of Sutton and McCallum (2005) in terms
of a particular approximate objective and a particular set
of constraints, providing new insight on the connection between piecewise training and LBP. We note that previous
work relating the two (Sutton & Minka, 2006) does so on
a procedural basis, viewing piecewise as a variant of LBP
that does not pass any messages.
This framework also allows us to evaluate the relative value

of different approximations to both the objective and the
constraints. In particular, our results show that even a simple linearization of the objective (just dropping the negative entropy terms) provides results comparable to the
full Bethe approximation. By contrast, we show that significant gains are obtained by incorporating the marginal
consistency constraints. In retrospect, this finding is perhaps not surprising, as this constraint encodes a true bias
about real-world probability distributions. It does, however, suggest that additional performance gains may be obtained by further reducing the space of allowable pseudomarginals by incorporating additional constraints that are
true for marginals of a valid probability distribution (Wainwright & Jordan, 2006; Sontag & Jaakkola, 2007). Thus,
the unified view of learning as constrained optimization of
an approximate entropy function enables an exploration of
the space of approximations for both the objective and the
constraints, a perspective that has dramatically improved
the performance of approximate inference over the past few
years.

Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems. Morgan Kaufmann.
Ren, X., & Malik, J. (2003). Learning a classification
model for segmentation. Proc. ICCV.
Shental, N., Zomet, A., Hertz, T., & Weiss, Y. (2003).
Learning and inferring image segmentations using the
GBP typical cut algorithm. Proc. ICCV.
Sontag, D., & Jaakkola, T. (2007). New outer bounds on
the marginal polytope. Proc. NIPS 21.
Sutton, C., & McCallum, A. (2004). Collective segmentation and labeling of distant entities in information extraction. ICML workshop on Statistical Relational Learning.
Sutton, C., & McCallum, A. (2005). Piecewise training of
undirected models. Proc. UAI.
Sutton, C., & Minka, T. (2006). Local training and belief
propagation (Technical Report). Microsoft Research.
Taskar, B., Abbeel, P., & Koller, D. (2002). Discriminative
probabilistic models for relational data. Proc. UAI 18.

Acknowledgments

Teh, Y. W., & Welling, M. (2001). The unified propagation
and scaling algorithm. Proc. NIPS.

This work was supported by the Office of Naval Research
under MURI N000140710747 and by the Boeing Corp. We
thank Ben Packer for helpful discussions.

Teh, Y. W., & Welling, M. (2003). On improving the efficiency of the iterative proportional fitting procedure.
AISTATS.

References
Berger, A., Pietra, V. D., & Pietra, S. D. (1996). A maximum entropy approach to natural language processing.
Computational Linguistics.
Elidan, G., McGraw, I., & Koller, D. (2006). Residual belief propagation: Informed scheduling for asynchronous
message passing. Proc. UAI.
Finkel, J., Grenager, T., & Manning, C. (2005). Incorporating non-local information into information extraction
systems by gibbs sampling. ACL.
Freitag, D. (1998). Machine learning for information extraction in informal domains. Doctoral thesis, CMU.
Gould, S., Rodgers, J., Cohen, D., Elidan, G., & Koller, D.
(2008). Multi-class segmentation with relative location
prior. International Journal on Computer Vision.
Heskes, T. (2006). Convexity arguments for efficient minimization of the Bethe and Kikuchi free energies. Journal
of Artificial Intelligence Research, 26, 153–190.
Lafferty, J., McCallum, A., & Pereira, F. (2001). Conditional random fields: Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling sequence data. Proc. ICML 18.
McCallum, A., Freitag, D., & Pereira, F. C. N. (2000).
Maximum entropy markov models for information extraction and segmentation. Proc. ICML (pp. 591–598).
Minka, T. P. (2001).
Algorithms for maximumlikelihood logistic regression.
Available from
http://www.stat.cmu.edu/˜minka/.

Vishwanathan, S. V. N., Schraudolph, N. N., Schmidt,
M. W., & Murphy, K. P. (2006). Accelerated training of
conditional random fields with stochastic gradient methods. ICML ’06 (pp. 969–976).
Wainwright, M., Jaakkola, T., & Willsky, A. (2003).
Tree-reweighted belief propagation algorithms and approximate ML estimation via pseudo-moment matching.
Proc. AISTATS.
Wainwright, M., & Jordan, M. (2006). Log=determinant
relaxation for approximate inference in discrete Markov
random fields. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing.
Wainwright, M. J. (2006). Estimating the ”wrong” graphical model: Benefits in the computation-limited setting.
J. Mach. Learn. Res., 7, 1829–1859.
Weiss, Y., Yanover, C., & Meltzer, T. (2007). MAP estimation, linear programming and belief propagation with
convex free energies. Proc. UAI.
Yedidia, J., Freeman, W., & Weiss, Y. (2005). Constructing
free-energy approximations and generalized belief propagation algorithms. IEEE Transaction on Information
Theory, 51, 2282–2312.
Yuille, A. L. (2002). CCCP algorithms to minimize the
Bethe and Kikuchi free energies: convergent alternatives
to belief propagation. Neural Comput., 14, 1691–1722.
Zhu, C., Byrd, R., Lu, P., & Nocedal, J. (1997). L-BFGS-B:
Algorithm 778: FORTRAN subroutines for large-scale
bound constrained optimization. ACM Transactions on
Mathematical Software, 23.

