studied yet, however. In this paper we define several
variants of the tuning problem for probabilistic networks and show that these variants are NPPP -complete
in general. We further show that the tuning problem
remains NP-comlete, even if the topological structure
of the network under study is restricted to a polytree,
and PP-complete, even if the number of conditional
probability tables involved is bounded.
Given the unfavorable complexity results obtained,
even for restricted cases of the tuning problem, we
have that we cannot expect to arrive at efficient, more
general computational methods for sensitivity analysis
and parameter tuning for probabilistic networks. Our
complexity results in fact suggest that further research
should concentrate on tuning a limited number of parameters, in networks where inference is tractable.
The paper is organized as follows. After briefly reviewing the basic concepts involved in sensitivity analysis
and parameter tuning in Section 2, we present some
preliminaries from complexity theory in Section 3 and
formally define several variants of the tuning problem
in Section 4. We give a general completeness proof for
these problems in Section 5. We further address some
special, restricted cases of these problems in Section
6. The paper ends with our concluding observations

in Section 7.

2

Sensitivity analysis and tuning

A probabilistic network B = (G, Γ) includes a directed
acyclic graph G = (V, A), where V = {V1 , . . . , Vn }
models a set of stochastic variables and A models the
(in)dependences between them, and a set of parameter probabilities Γ, capturing the strengths of the relationships between the variables. The network
Qn models
a joint probability distribution Pr(V) = i=1 Pr(vi |
π(Vi )) over its variables, where π(V ) denotes the parents of V in G. We will use Pr(C = c | E = e) to denote
the probability of the value c of the output variable C,
given an instantiation e to the set of evidence variables E, which will be abbreviated as Pr(c | e). We
will denote a particular set of parameter probabilities
as X ⊆ Γ, and we will use X to denote a single parameter. We will use x and x to denote the combination of
values of a set of parameters, respectively the value of
a single parameter. In sensitivity analysis and parameter tuning, we are interested in the effect of changes
in the parameter probabilities X on an output probability for a designated variable C. The sensitivity
function fPr(c|e) (X) expresses the probability of the
output in terms of the parameter set X. We will omit
the subscript if no ambiguity can occur.
In a one-way sensitivity analysis, we measure the sensitivity of an output probability of interest with respect
to a single parameter. The parameter under consideration is systematically varied from 0 to 1 and the other
parameters from the same CPT are co-varied such
that their mutual proportional relationship is kept constant [20]. Thus, if the parameter X = Pr(bi | ρ) (denoting the conditional probability of the value bi of
the variable B given a particular configuration ρ of
B’s parents) is varied from 0 to 1, the other parameters P r(bj | ρ) for the variable B are varied such that
Pr(bj | ρ)(X) = Pr(bj | ρ) ·

1−X
1 − Pr(bi | ρ)

for any value bj other than bi . Under the condition of
covariation, the sensitivity function f (X) is a quotient
of two linear functions [7] and takes the form
c1 · X + c2
c3 · X + c4
where the constants can be calculated from the other
parameter probabilities in the network.
f (X) =

A one-way sensitivity analysis can be extended to measure the effect of the simultaneous variation of two parameters on the output [5]. The sensitivity function
then generalizes to
f (X1 , X2 ) =

c1 · X1 · X2 + c2 · X1 + c3 · X2 + c4
c5 · X1 · X2 + c6 · X1 + c7 · X2 + c8

In this function, the terms c1 · X1 · X2 and c5 · X1 · X2
capture the interaction effect of the parameters on the
output variable. This can further be generalized to nway sensitivity analyses [6, 2] where multiple parameters are varied simultaneously. While higher-order
analyses can reveal synergistic effects of variation, the
results are often difficult to interpret [20].
For performing a one-way sensitivity analysis, efficient
algorithms are available that build upon the observation that for establishing the sensitivity of an output
probability it suffices to determine the constants in the
associated sensitivity function. The simplest method
for this purpose is to compute, from the network, the
probability of interest for up to three values for the parameter under study; using the functional form of the
function to be established, a system of linear equations
is obtained, which is subsequently solved [7]. For the
network computations involved, any standard propagation algorithm can be used. A more efficient method
determines the required constants by propagating information through a junction tree, similar to the standard junction-tree propagation algorithm [12]. This
method requires a very small number of inward and
outward propagations in the tree to determine either
the constants of all sensitivity functions that relate the
probability of interest to any one of the network parameters, or to determine the sensitivity functions for
any output probability in terms of a single parameter.
Both algorithms are exponential in the size of the network, yet have a polynomial running time for networks
of bounded treewidth.
Closely related to analyzing the effect of variation of
parameters on the output—and often the next step after performing such an analysis—is tuning the parameters, such that the output has the desired properties.
The output may need to satisfy particular constraints,
e.g. Pr(c | e) ≥ q, Pr(c1 | e)/ Pr(c2 | e) ≥ q or
Pr(c1 | e) − Pr(c2 | e) ≥ q, for a particular value q.
There are a number of algorithms to determine the
solution space for a set of parameters given such constraints [2]. The computational complexity of these
algorithms is always exponential in the treewidth w of
the graph (i.e., the size of the largest clique in the jointree), yet varies from O(cw ) for single parameter tunQk
ing, to O(n · i=1 F (Xi ) · cw ) for tuning n parameters,
where c is a constant, k is the number of CPTs that include at least one of the parameters being varied, and
F (Xi ) denotes the size of the i-th CPT. Note that the
tuning problem is related to the inference problem in
so-called credal networks [8], where each variable is associated with sets of probability measures, rather than
single values as in Bayesian networks. This problem
has been proven NPPP -complete [9].
Often, we want to select a combination of values for the

parameters that satisfies the constraints on the output
probability of interest, but has minimal impact on the
other probabilities computed from the network. In
other cases, we want the modification to be as small
as possible. In other words, we want to find a tuning
that not merely satisfies the constraints, but is also optimal, either with respect to the minimal amount of parameter change needed, or the minimal change in the
joint probability distribution induced by the parameter change. Here we discuss two typical distance measures between joint probability distributions, namely
those proposed by Kullback and Leibler [13], and Chan
and Darwiche [3].
The distance measure introduced by Chan and Darwiche [3], denoted by DCD , between two joint probability distributions Prx and Prx0 is defined as:
def

DCD (Prx , Prx0 ) = ln max
ω

Prx (ω)
Prx (ω)
− ln min
ω Prx0 (ω)
Prx0 (ω)

where ω is taken to range over the joint probabilities
of the variables in the network. The Kullback-Leibler
measure [13], denoted by DKL , is defined as:
def

DKL (Prx , Prx0 ) =

X

Prx (ω) ln

ω

Prx (ω)
Prx0 (ω)

Calculating either distance between two distributions
is intractable in general. It can be proven that calculating DCD is NP-complete and that calculating DKL
is PP-complete1 . The Euclidean distance is a convenient way to measure the amount of change needed in
x to go from Prx to Prx0 . This distance, denoted by
DE , is defined as:
s X
def
(xi − x0i )2
DE (x, x0 ) =
xi ∈x,x0i ∈x0

The Euclidean distance depends only on the parameters that are changed and can be calculated in O(| X |).

3

Complexity theory

In the remainder, we assume that the reader is familiar with basic concepts of computational complexity
theory, such as the classes P and NP, and completeness proofs. For a thorough introduction to these subjects we refer to textbooks like [10] and [16]. In addition to these basic concepts, we use the complexity class PP (Probabilistic Polynomial time). This
class contains languages L accepted in polynomial time
by a Probabilistic Turing Machine. Such a machine
augments the more traditional non-deterministic Turing Machine with a probability distribution associated
1
These results are not yet published but will be substantiated in a forthcoming paper.

with each state transition, e.g. by providing the machine with a tape, randomly filled with symbols [11]. If
all choice points are binary and the probability of each
transition is 21 , then the majority of the computation
paths accept a string s if and only if s ∈ L.
A typical problem in PP (in fact PP-complete) is the
Inference problem [15, 18]: given a network B, a
variable V1 in V, and a rational number 0 ≤ q ≤ 1,
determine whetherQPr(V1 = v1 ) ≥ q. Recall that
n
Pr(V1 , . . . , Vn ) = i=1 Pr(Vi | π(Vi )). To determine
whether Pr(v1 ) ≥ q, we sum over all marginal probabilities Pr(V1 , . . . , Vn ) that are consistent with v1 . This
can be done using a Probabilistic Turing Machine in
polynomial time. The machine calculates the multiplication of conditional probabilities Pr(Vi | π(Vi )),
i = 1, . . . , n, choosing a computation path in which
each variable Vi is assigned a value according to the
conditional probability Pr(Vi | π(Vi )). Each computation path corresponds to a specific joint value assignment, and the probability of arriving in a particular
state corresponds with the probability of that assignment. At the end of this computation path, we accept
with probability 21 + ( 1q − 1), if the joint value assignment to V1 , . . . , Vn is consistent with v1 , and we accept
with probability ( 21 − ) if the joint value assignment
is not consistent with v1 . The majority of the computation paths (i.e., 12 + ) then arrives in an accepting
state if and only if Pr(v1 ) ≥ q.
Another concept from complexity theory that we will
use in this paper is oracle access. A Turing Machine
M has oracle access to languages in the class A, denoted as MA , if it can query the oracle in one state
transition, i.e., in O(1). We can regard the oracle as
a ‘black box’ that can answer membership queries in
constant time. For example, NPPP is defined as the
class of languages which are decidable in polynomial
time on a non-deterministic Turing Machine with access to an oracle deciding problems in PP. Informally,
computational problems related to probabilistic networks that are in NPPP typically combine some sort of
selecting with probabilistic inference.
Not all real numbers are exactly computable in finite
time. Since using real numbers may obscure the true
complexity of the problems under consideration, we assume that all parameter probabilities in our network
are rational numbers, thus ensuring that all calculated
probabilities are rational numbers as well. This is a realistic assumption, since the probabilities are normally
either assessed by domain experts or estimated by a
learning algorithm from data instances. For similar
reasons, we assume that ln(x) is approximated within
a finite precision, polynomial in the binary representation of x.

4

Problem definitions

In the previous sections, we have encountered a number of computational problems related to sensitivity
analysis and parameter tuning. To prove hardness results, we will first define decision problems related to
these questions. Because of the formulation in terms
of decision problems, all problems are in fact tuning
problems.
Parameter Tuning
Instance: Let B = (G, Γ) be a Bayesian network
where Γ is composed of rational probabilities, and let
Pr be its joint probability distribution. Let X ⊆ Γ be
a set of parameters in the network, let C denote the
output variable, and c a particular value of C.
Furthermore, let E denote a set of evidence variables
with joint value assignment e, and let 0 ≤ q ≤ 1.
Question: Is there a combination of values x for the
parameters in X such that Prx (c | e) ≥ q?
Parameter Tuning Range
Instance: As in Parameter Tuning.
Question: Are there combinations of values x and
x0 for the parameters in X such that
Prx (c | e) − Prx0 (c | e) ≥ q?
Evidence Parameter Tuning Range
Instance: As in Parameter Tuning; furthermore
let e1 and e2 denote two particular joint value
assignments to the set of evidence variables E.
Question: Is there a combination of values x for the
parameters in X such that
Prx (c | e1 ) − Prx (c | e2 ) ≥ q?
Minimal Parameter Tuning Range
Instance: As in Parameter Tuning; furthermore
let r ∈ Q+ .
Question: Are there combinations of values x and
x0 for the parameters in X such that DE (x, x0 ) ≤ r
and such that Prx (c | e) − Prx0 (c | e) ≥ q?
Minimal Change Parameter Tuning Range
Instance: As in Parameter Tuning; furthermore
let s ∈ Q+ , and let D denote a distance measure for
two joint probability distributions as reviewed in
Section 2 .
Question: Are there combinations of values x and
x0 for the parameters in X such that D(x, x0 ) ≤ s
and Prx (c | e) − Prx0 (c | e) ≥ q?
Mode Tuning
Instance: As in Parameter Tuning; furthermore
let >(Pr(C)) denote the mode of Pr(C).
Question: Are there combinations of values x and
x0 for the parameters in X such that
>(Prx (C | e)) 6= >(Prx0 (C | e))?

Furthermore, we define Evidence Mode Tuning,
Minimal Parameter Mode Tuning, and Minimal
Change Mode Tuning corresponding to the Parameter Tuning variants of these problems.

5

Completeness results

We will construct a hardness proof for the Parameter Tuning Range problem. Hardness of the other
problems can be derived with minimal changes to the
proof construction. More specifically, we prove NPPP hardness of the Parameter Tuning Range-problem
by a reduction from E-Majsat; this latter problem
has been proven complete by Wagner [21] for the class
NPPP . We will use a reduction technique, similar to
the technique used by Park and Darwiche [17] to prove
NPPP -hardness of the Partial Map-problem.
We first observe that all tuning problems from Section
4 are in NPPP : given x, x0 , q, r and s, we can verify all claims in polynomial time using a PP oracle,
since inference is PP-complete [18]. For example, with
the use of the oracle, we can verify in polynomial time
whether Prx (c | e) − Prx0 (c | e) ≥ q, for a given x, x0 ,
and q. Likewise, we can calculate the Euclidean distance of x and x0 in polynomial time and verify that it
is less than r. Determining whether a distance between
two joint probability distributions is smaller than s is
NP-complete (for the distance DCD defined by Chan
and Darwiche [3]) or PP-complete (for the distance
DKL defined by Kullback and Leibler [13]). Thus, we
can non-deterministically compute an assignment to
X and check (using a PP oracle) that the distance is
smaller than s. Therefore, all problems are in NPPP .
To prove hardness, we will reduce Parameter Tuning Range from E-Majsat, defined as follows:
E-Majsat
Instance: Let φ be a Boolean formula with n
variables Vi (1 ≤ 1 ≤ n), grouped into two disjoint
sets VE = V1 , . . . , Vk and VM = Vk+1 , . . . , Vn .
Question: Is there an instantiation to VE such that
for at least half of the instantiations to VM , φ is
satisfied?
We construct a probabilistic network Bφ from a given
Boolean formula φ with n variables Vi and instantiation templates VE and VM . For all variables Vi , in
the formula φ, we create a matching stochastic variable Vi in V for the network Bφ , with possible values true and false with uniform distribution. These
variables are roots in the network Bφ . We denote
Xi = Pr(Vi = true) as the parameter of Vi .
For each logical operator in φ, we create an additional
stochastic variable in the network, whose parents are

constructed as described above. Trivially, there exists a combination of parameter values x0 such that
Prx0 (C = true) = 0, namely all assignments in which
XS = 0. In that case, at least one of the parents
of C has the value false with probability 1 and thus
Prx0 (C = true) = 0.

C
∧

S
¬

¬

∨
V1

Vφ

V3
V2

VM

VE

Figure 1: Example of construction

the corresponding sub-formulas (or single variable in
case of a negation operator) and whose conditional
probability table is equal to the truth table of that
operator. For example, the ∧-operator would have a
conditional probability Pr(∧ = true) = 1 if and only
if both its parents have the value true, and 0 otherwise. We denote the stochastical variable that is
associated with the top-level operator in φ with Vφ .
Furthermore, we add a variable S with values true
and false, with uniform probability distribution where
XS = Pr(S = true) is the parameter of S. Lastly, we
have an output variable C, with parents S and Vφ and
values true and false, whose CPT is equal to the truth
table of the ∧-operator. The set of parameters X in
the Parameter Tuning Range problem now is defined to be {X1 , . . . , Xk } ∪ XS , i.e., the parameters of
the variables in VE and the parameter of S. We set
q = 21 .
Figure 1 shows the graphical structure of the probabilistic network constructed for the E-Majsat instance (φ, VE , VM ), where φ = ¬(V1 ∨ V2 ) ∧ ¬V3 ,
VE = {V1 , V2 }, and VM = {V3 }. Note that this EMajsat instance is satisfiable with V1 = V2 = F ; for
that instantiation to VE , at least half of the possible
instantiations to VM will satisfy the formula.
Theorem 1. Parameter Tuning Range is NPPP complete.
PP

Proof. Membership of NP can be proved as follows.
Given x0 and x, we can verify whether Prx (c | e) −
Prx0 (c | e) ≥ q in polynomial time, given an oracle that
decides Inference. Since Inference is PP-complete,
this proves membership of NPPP .
To prove hardness, we construct a transformation from
the E-Majsat problem. Let (φ, VE , VM ) be an instance of E-Majsat, and let Bφ be a probabilistic
network, with parameters x = {X1 , . . . , Xk } ∪ XS ,

On the other hand, if x includes XS = 1, then Prx (C =
true) depends on the values of X1 , . . . , Xk . More
in particular, there exist parameter values such that
Prx (C = true) ≥ 21 , if and only if (φ, VE , VM ) has a
solution. We can construct a solution x by assigning 1
to XS , 1 to all variables in {X1 , . . . , Xk } where the corresponding variable in VE is set to true, and 0 where
it is set to false. On the other hand, if (φ, VE , VM ) is
not satisfiable, then Prx (C = true) will be less than
1
2 for any parameter setting. Due to the nature of
the CPTs of the ‘operator’ variables which mimic the
truth tables of the operators, Prx (C = true) = 1 for
a value assignment to the parameters that is consistent with a satisfying truth assignment to φ. If there
does not exist a truth assignment to the variables in
VE such that the majority of the truth assignments to
the variables in VM satisfies φ, then there cannot be a
value assignment to X such that Prx (C = true) ≥ 12 .
Thus, if we can decide whether there exist two sets of
parameter settings x and x0 such that in this network
Bφ , Prx (C = true) − Prx0 (C = true) ≥ q, then we can
answer (φ, VE , VM ) as well. This reduces E-Majsat
to Tuning Parameter Range.
Note that the constructed proof shows, that the Parameter Tuning Range problem remains NPPP complete, even if we restrict the set of parameters to
constitute only prior probabilities, if all variables are
binary, if all nodes have indegree at most 2, if the output is a singleton variable, and if there is no evidence.
We will now show completeness proofs of the other
problems.
Corollary 2. All tuning problems defined in Section
4 are NPPP -complete.
Proof. We will show how the above construction can
be adjusted to prove hardness for these problems.
• Parameter Tuning: From the above construct, leave out the nodes S and C, such that
x = {X1 , . . . , Xk }. There is an instantiation x
such that Prx (Vφ = true) ≥ 12 , if and only if
(φ, VE , VM ) has a solution.
• Evidence Parameter Tuning Range: From
the above construct, replace S with a singleton
evidence variable E with values true and false
and uniform distribution; denote E = true as e1
and E = false as e2 and let x = {X1 , . . . , Xk }.

Prx (C = true | E = e2 ) = 0 for all possible parameter settings of x. On the other hand,
Prx (Vφ = true) ≥ 12 and thus Prx (C = true | E =
e1 ) ≥ 21 if and only if (φ, VE , VM ) has a solution.
• Minimal Parameter Tuning Range and
Minimal Change Parameter Tuning
Range: These problems have Tuning Parameter Range as a special case (set r, s = ∞) and
thus hardness follows by restriction.
• Mode Tuning: Since C has two values, Pr(C =
false) = 1 − Pr(C = true). In particular, >(C) =
true if Pr(C = true) ≥ 12 , and >(C) = false if
Pr(C = false) ≥ 21 . If XS = 0 then >(C) = false.
Pr(C = true) ≥ 21 , if and only if >(C) = true.
Evidence Mode Tuning, Minimal Parameter
Mode Tuning, and Minimal Change Mode Tuning: Apply similar construct modifications as with the
corresponding Parameter Tuning problems.

6

Restricted problem variants

In the previous section, we have shown that in the
general case, Parameter Tuning Range is NPPP complete. In this section, the complexity of the problem is studied for restricted classes of instances. More
in particular, we will discuss tuning problems in networks with bounded topologies and tuning problems
with a bounded number of CPTs containing parameters to be tuned.
6.1

S0

V1

V2

Vn

VS

S1

S2

Sn

C

Figure 2: Construction with polytrees

probability distribution. We denote the parameter of
Vi as Xi as in the previous construct. We define a
clause selector variable S0 with values c1 , . . . , cm and
1
uniform probability, i.e. Pr(S0 = ci ) = m
. Furthermore, we define clause satisfaction variables Si , with
values c0 , . . . , cm , associated with each variable. Every variable Si has Vi and Si−1 as parents. Lastly, we
define a variable VS , with values true and false, with
uniform probability distribution, and parameter XS ,
and a variable C with values true and false, parents
XS and Sn . See Figure 2 for the topology of this network. The CPT for Si (i ≥ 1) and C is given in Table 1.
In this table, T (Vi , j) and F (Vi , j) are Boolean predicates that evaluate to 1 if the truth assignment to Vi
satisfies, respectively does not satisfy, the j-th clause.

Si−1
c0
cj

Pr(Si | Vi , Si−1 )
Si = c0
Si 6= c0
1
0
T (Vi , j) F (Vi , j)

Pr(C = T | VS , Sn )
Sn xS
¬xS
c0
1
0
cj
1
1

Table 1: CPT for Pr(Si | Vi , Si−1 ) and Pr(C | Sn , VS )

Bounded topologies

In this section we will show that restrictions on the
topology of the network alone will not suffice to make
the problem tractable. In fact, Parameter Tuning
Range remains hard, even if B is a polytree. Similar
results can be derived for the other problems. To prove
NP-completeness of Parameter Tuning Range on
polytrees, we reduce Maxsat to Parameter Tuning
Range on polytrees, using a slightly modified proof
from [17]. The (unweighted) Maxsat problem is defined as follows:
Maxsat
Instance: Let φ be a Boolean formula in CNF
format, let Cφ = C1 . . . Cm denote its clauses and
Vφ = V1 . . . Vn its variables, and let 1 ≤ k ≤ m.
Question: Is there an assignment to the variables in
φ, such that at least k clauses are satisfied?
We will construct a polytree network B as follows. For
each variable in the formula, we create a variable in
the network with values true and false, with uniform

Theorem 3. Parameter Tuning Range remains
NP-complete if B is restricted to polytrees.

Proof. Membership of NP is immediate, since we can
decide Inference in polynomial time on polytrees.
Given x0 and x, we can thus verify whether Prx0 (C =
c) − Prx (C = c) ≥ q in polynomial time.
To prove NP-hardness, we reduce Maxsat to Parameter Tuning Range. Let (φ, k) be an instance of
Maxsat. From the clauses Cφ and variables Vφ , we
construct Bφ as discussed above. Similarly as in the
previous proof, if XS = 0 then Pr(C = true) = 0
for any instantiation to the parameters X1 to Xn . If
XS = 1 then we observe the following. For every instantiation cj to S0 , the probability distribution of Si
is as follows. Pr(Si = c0 | Vi ) = 1 if the instantiation to V1 . . . Vi satisfies clause cj , and 0 otherwise.
Pr(Si = cj | Vi ) = 1 if this instantiation does not satisfy clause cj .

Pr(Si | xi ) =


Si = c0 , V1...i satisfies cj


 Si = cj , V1...i satisfies cj

Si = c0 , V1...i does not satisfy cj



 Si = cj , V1...i does not satisfy cj
otherwise

1
0
0
1
0

Of course, Pr(Si ) is conditioned on Vi and thus depends on Xi . For Xi = 0 or Xi = 1, either Pr(Si =
c0 ) = 1 or Pr(Si = cj ) = 1, for intermediate values of
Xi the probability mass is shared between Pr(Si = c0 )
and Pr(Si = cj ). But then Pr(Sn = c0 ) is 1 for a particular clause selection cj in S0 , if and only if the parameter setting to X1 to Xn satisfies that clause. Due
to the conditional probability table of C and XS = 1,
Prx (C = true) = 1 if and only if the parameter setting x satisfies that clause. Summing over S0 yields
Prx (C = true) = nk , where k is the number of clauses
that is satisfied by x. Thus, a Parameter Tuning
Range query with values 0 and nk would solve the
Maxsat problem. This proves NP-hardness of Parameter Tuning Range on polytrees.
6.2

Bounded number of CPTs

In the previous section we have shown that a restriction on the topology of the network in itself does not
suffice to make parameter tuning tractable. In this section we will show that bounding the number of CPTs
containing parameters in X in itself is not sufficient
either. Note that trivial solutions to the Parameter
Tuning may exist for particular subsets X of the set
of parameter probabilities Γ. For example, if X constitutes all conditional probabilities Pr(C = c | π(C)), for
all configurations of parents of C, then a trivial solution would set all these parameters to q. If the number
of parameters in X is logarithmic in the total number
of parameter probabilities, i.e., | X |≤ p(log | Γ |) for
any polynomial p, then the problem is in PPP , since we
can try all combinations of parameter settings to 0 or
1 in polynomial time, using a PP-oracle.
If both the number of CPTs containing one or more
parameters in the set X is bounded by a factor k (independent of the number of total number of parameter probabilities), and the indegree of the corresponding nodes is bounded, then Parameter Tuning is
PP-complete. Hardness follows immediately since Parameter Tuning has Inference as a trivial special
case (for zero parameters). We will prove membership of PP for this problem for a single parameter in
a root node and show that the result also holds for a
k-bounded number of CPTs with m parents. Similar
observations can be made for the other tuning problems defined in Section 4.
Theorem 4. Parameter Tuning is PP-complete if
the number of CPTs containing parameters and the
indegree of the corresponding nodes are bounded.

Proof. First let us assume k = 1, i.e., all n parameters are taken from the CPT of a single node V .
Furthermore, let us assume for now that V is a root
node. To solve Parameter Tuning, we need to decide whether Pr(C = c) ≥ q for a particular combination of values of
Pthe parameters in X. Conditioning
on V gives
us
i Pr(C = c | V = vi ) · Pr(V = vi ).
P
Since
Pr(V
=
vi ) = 1, Pr(C = c) is maximal
i
for Pr(V = vi ) = 1 for a particular vi . Thus, if we
want to decide whether Pr(C = c) ≥ q for a particular combination of values of the parameters, then it
suffices to determine whether this is the case when we
set Pr(V = vi ) = 1 for a particular parameter vi .2
Using this observation, we will construct a Probabilistic Turing Machine M by combining several machines
accepting Inference instances. At its first branching step, M either accepts with probability 12 , or
1
runs, with probability 2n
, one of n Probabilistic Turing Machines Mi (i = 1, . . . , n), which on input Bφ,i
(with Pr(V = vi ) = 1) and q accept if and only if
Pr(C = c) = q. If any Mi accepts, then M accepts.
The majority of computation paths of M accepts if
and only if the Parameter Tuning instance is satisfiable. If V is not a root node, then we must branch
over each parent configuration. For k CPTs with at
most n parameters in each CPT and m incoming arcs,
we need to construct a combined Probabilistic Turk
ing Machine consisting of O(nm ) Probabilistic Turing Machines accepting instances of Inference. For
bounded m and k, this is a polynomial number of machines and thus computation takes polynomial time.
Thus, Parameter Tuning is in PP for a bounded
number of CPTs containing parameters and a bounded
indegree of the corresponding nodes m and k.

7

Conclusion

In this paper, we have addressed the computational
complexity of several variants of parameter tuning.
Existing algorithms for sensitivity analysis and parameter tuning (see e.g. [2]) have a running time, exponential in both the treewidth of the graph and in the
number of parameters varied. We have shown that parameter tuning is indeed hard, even if the network has
a restricted polytree and if the number of parameters is
bounded. We conclude, that Parameter Tuning is
tractable only if both constraints are met, i.e., if probabilistic inference is easy and the number of parameters
involved is bounded.
2
If the number of parameters subject to tuning does not
constitute all parameter probabilities in the CPT, then we
need to test whether Pr(C = c) ≥ q when all parameters
have the value 0 as well.

Acknowledgments
This research has been (partly) supported by the
Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research
(NWO). The authors wish to thank Hans Bodlaender
and Gerard Tel for their insightful comments on earlier
drafts of this paper. We wish to thank the anonymous
reviewers for their thoughtful remarks.

References
[1] E. Castillo, J. M. Gutiérrez, and A. S. Hadi. Sensitivity analysis in discrete Bayesian networks.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 27:412–423, 1997.
[2] H. Chan and A. Darwiche. Sensitivity analysis in Bayesian networks: From single to multiple parameters. In Twentieth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 67–75.
AUAI Press, 2004.
[3] H. Chan and A. Darwiche. A distance measure for bounding probabilistic belief change. International Journal of Approximate Reasoning,
38(2):149–174, 2005.
[4] Th. Charitos and L. C. van der Gaag. Sensitivity analysis for threshold decision making with
DBNs. In 22nd Conference on Uncertainty in
Artificial Intelligence, pages 72–79. AUAI Press,
2006.
[5] V. Coupé, L. C. van der Gaag, and J. D. F.
Habbema. Sensitivity analysis: an aid for beliefnetwork quantification. Knowledge Engineering
Review, 15:1–18, 2000.
[6] V. M. H. Coupé, F. V. Jensen, U. B. Kjærulff,
and L. C. van der Gaag. A computational architecture for n-way sensitivity analysis of Bayesian
networks. Technical Report 102156, Aalborg University, 2000.
[7] V.M.H. Coupé and L.C. van der Gaag. Properties
of sensitivity analysis of Bayesian belief networks.
Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence,
36(4):323–356, 2002.
[8] Fabio G. Cozman. Credal networks. Artificial
Intelligence, 120(2):199–233, 2000.
[9] C. P. de Campos and F. G. Cozman. The inferential complexity of bayesian and credal networks. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Edinburgh, UK, 2005, pages
1313–1318, 2005.

[10] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson. Computers
and Intractability. A Guide to the Theory of NPCompleteness. W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco, 1979.
[11] J. T. Gill. Computational complexity of Probabilistic Turing Machines. SIAM Journal of Computing, 6(4), 1977.
[12] U. Kjærulff and L. C. van der Gaag. Making sensitivity analysis computationally efficient. In Sixteenth Conference in Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 317–325. San Francisco: Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, 2002.
[13] S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler. On information and sufficiency. The Annals of Mathematical
Statistics, 22:79–86, 1951.
[14] K. B. Laskey. Sensitivity analysis for probability
assessments in Bayesian networks. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 25:901–
909, 1995.
[15] M. L. Littman, S. M. Majercik, and T. Pitassi.
Stochastic boolean satisfiability. Journal of Automated Reasoning, 27(3):251–296, 2001.
[16] C. H. Papadimitriou. Computational Complexity.
Addison-Wesley, 1994.
[17] J. D. Park and A. Darwiche. Complexity results
and approximation settings for MAP explanations. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
21:101–133, 2004.
[18] D. Roth. On the hardness of approximate reasoning. Artificial Intelligence, 82(1-2):273–302, 1996.
[19] L. C. van der Gaag and S. Renooij. Analysing
sensitivity data. In Seventeenth Conference on
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 530–
527. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, 2001.
[20] L. C. van der Gaag, S. Renooij, and V. M. H.
Coupé. Sensitivity analysis of probabilistic networks. In P. Lucas, J.A. Gámez, and A. Salmeron,
editors, Advances in Probabilistic Graphical Models, Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computing, volume 213, pages 103–124. Berlin: Springer Verlag,
2007.
[21] K. W. Wagner. The complexity of combinatorial
problems with succinct input representation. Acta
Informatica, 23:325–356, 1986.

