given a member of that class.
In many cases, however, the data generating process might involve unobserved confounders or selection variables, and we need to consider DAGs with
latent variables to model the process. Such latent
variable DAG models can be represented by ancestral
graphical models (Richardson and Spirtes - henceforth
RS, 2002), in that for any DAG with latent variables,
there is a unique maximal ancestral graph (MAG) that
represents the conditional independence relations and
causal relations among the observed variables entailed
by the DAG. Ali et al. (2005) made an important step
towards characterizing Markov equivalence classes for
MAGs by providing rules sufficient to construct all arrowheads common to a Markov equivalence class of
MAGs. In this paper, we provide extra rules sufficient
to construct all common tails, which encode important
causal information. We end up with a set of orientation rules sound and complete for identifying commonalities across a Markov equivalence class of MAGs.
Section 2 introduces relevant definitions. We summarize the arrowhead complete rules in section 3, and
present the extra rules and tail completeness in section 4. We close with some discussions in section 5.

2

BACKGROUND

The following example attributed to Chris Meek in
Richardson (1998) illustrates nicely the primary motivation behind ancestral graphs:
“The graph [Figure 1] represents a randomized trial of an ineffective drug with unpleasant
side-effects. Patients are randomly assigned to
the treatment or control group (A). Those in
the treatment group suffer unpleasant side-effects

ZHANG
(Ef ), the severity of which is influenced by the patient’s general level of health (H), with sicker patients suffering worse side-effects. Those patients
who suffer sufficiently severe side-effects are likely
to drop out of the study. The selection variable
(Sel) records whether or not a patient remains in
the study, thus for all those remaining in the study
Sel = StayIn. Since unhealthy patients who are
taking the drug are more likely to drop out, those
patients in the treatment group who remain in the
study tend to be healthier than those in the control group. Finally health status (H) influences
how rapidly the patient covers (R).” (Richardson
1998, pp. 234)

451

bi-directed (↔) and undirected (−−). The two ends
of an edge we call marks or orientations. So the
two marks of a bi-directed edge are both arrowheads
(>), the two marks of an undirected edge are both
tails (−), and a directed edge has one of each. We say
an edge is into (or out of) a vertex if the edge mark
at the vertex is an arrowhead (or a tail). The meaning of standard graph theoretical concepts in directed
graphs, such as parent/child, (directed) path, ancestor/descendant, etc., remains the same in mixed
graphs. Furthermore, if there is a bi-directed edge between two vertices X and Y (X ↔ Y ), then X is called
a spouse of Y . If there is an undirected edge between
X and Y (X −−Y ), then X is called a neighbor of Y .
Definition 1. A mixed graph is ancestral if

A

H
Ef

(a1) there is no directed cycle;
R

Sel

Figure 1: A Causal Mechanism with Latent and Selection Variables
This simple case shows how the presence of latent confounders and/or selection variables matters. The variables of primary interest, A and R, are observed to
be correlated, even though the supposed causal mechanism entails independence between them. This correlation is not due to sample variation, but rather corresponds to genuine probabilistic association induced
by design – only the subjects that eventually stay in
the study are considered. The observed correlation is
in effect a correlation conditional on the selection variable Sel, a canonical example of selection effect. H,
on the other hand, is a familiar latent confounder that
contributes to ”spurious correlation”.
A major virtue of ancestral graphs is that, without
explicitly including latent variables, they can represent conditional independence relations and causal relations among observed variables when the underlying
data generating process involves latent confounders
and/or selection variables (Spirtes and Richardson
1996). This of course requires a richer syntax than
DAGs. Besides directed edges, an ancestral graph
can also contain bi-directed edges (associated with the
presence of latent confounders), and undirected edges
(associated with the presence of selection variables).
2.1

MAXIMAL ANCESTRAL GRAPHS

By a mixed graph we denote a vertex-edge graph
that can contain three kinds of edges: directed (→),

(a2) if V1 is a spouse of V2 (i.e., V1 ↔ V2 ), then V1 is
not an ancestor of V2 ; and
(a3) if V1 is a neighbor of V2 (i.e., V1 −−V2 ), then V1
has no parents or spouses.
Obviously DAGs and undirected graphs (UGs) –
graphs in which all edges are undirected – meet the definition, and hence are special cases of ancestral graphs.
The first condition in Definition 1 is just the familiar
one for DAGs. Together with the second condition,
they define a nice connotation of arrowheads – that
is, an arrowhead implies non-ancestorship. The third
condition requires that there is no edge into any vertex in the undirected component of an ancestral graph.
This property simplifies parameterization and fitting
of ancestral graphs (RS 2002, Drton and Richardson
2003), and still allows selection effect to be properly
represented.
Mixed graphs encode conditional independence relations by essentially the same graphical criterion as
the well-known d-separation for DAGs, except that in
mixed graphs colliders can arise in more edge configurations than they do in DAGs. Given a path p in a
mixed graph, a non-endpoint vertex V on p is called a
collider if the two edges incident to V on p are both
into V , otherwise V is called a non-collider.
Definition 2 (m-separation). In a mixed graph,
a path p between vertices X and Y is active (mconnecting) relative to a set of vertices Z (X, Y ∈
/ Z)
if
i. every non-collider on p is not a member of Z;
ii. every collider on p has a descendant in Z.
X and Y are said to be m-separated by Z if there is
no active path between X and Y relative to Z.

452

ZHANG

The following property is true of DAGs and UGs: if
two vertices are not adjacent, then there is a set of
vertices that m-separates the two. This, however, is
not true of ancestral graphs in general. For example,
Figure 2(a) is an ancestral graph that fails this condition: C and D are not adjacent, but no subset of
{A, B} m-separates them.

A

B

A

B

C

D

C

D

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: (a) an ancestral graph that is not maximal;
(b) a maximal ancestral graph

This motivates the following definition:
Definition 3 (maximality). An ancestral graph is
said to be maximal if for any two non-adjacent vertices, there is a set of vertices that m-separates them.
It is shown in RS (2002) that every non-maximal ancestral graph can be easily transformed to a unique
supergraph that is ancestral and maximal by adding
bi-directed edges. This justifies considering only those
ancestral graphs that are maximal (MAGs). From now
on, we focus on maximal ancestral graphs, which we
will refer to as MAGs. A notion closely related to
maximality is that of inducing path:

2.2

MARKOV EQUIVALENCE

As a probabilistic model, a MAG represents a set of
joint distributions that satisfy the conditional independence relations implied by m-separation in the MAG.
Hence two MAGs that share the same m-separation
structures represent the same set of distributions.
Definition 5 (Markov equivalence). Two MAGs
G1 , G2 (with the same set of vertices) are Markov
equivalent if for any three disjoint sets of vertices
X, Y, Z, X and Y are m-separated by Z in G1 if and
only if X and Y are m-separated by Z in G2 .
It is well known that two DAGs are Markov equivalent
if and only if they have the same adjacencies and the
same unshielded colliders (Verma and Pearl 1990). (A
triple hX, Y, Zi is said to be unshielded if X, Y are
adjacent, Y, Z are adjacent but X, Z are not adjacent.)
The conditions are still necessary for Markov equivalence between MAGs, but are not sufficient. For two
MAGs to be equivalent, some shielded colliders have
to be present in both or neither of the graphs. The
next definition is related to this.
Definition 6 (discriminating path). In a MAG,
a path between X and Y , p = hX, · · · , W, V, Y i, is a
discriminating path for V if
i. p includes at least three edges (i.e., at least four
vertices as specified);
ii. V is adjacent to an endpoint Y on p; and
iii. X is not adjacent to Y , and every vertex between
X and V is a collider on p and is a parent of Y .

Definition 4 (inducing path). In an ancestral
graph, a path p between X and Y is called an inducing
path if every non-endpoint vertex on p is a collider
and is an ancestor of either X or Y .
For example, in Figure 2(a), the path hC, A, B, Di is
an inducing path between C and D. RS (2002) proved
that the presence of an inducing path is necessary and
sufficient for two vertices not to be m-separated by
any set. So an ancestral graph is maximal if and only
if there is no inducing path between any two nonadjacent vertices in the graph.
As shown in RS (2002), the class of MAGs is closed
under marginalization and conditioning. Hence MAGs
can represent independent relations among observed
variables entailed by a DAG with latent confounders
(to be marginalized over) and/or selection variables
(to be conditioned upon). For details of how MAGs
represent DAG models with latent variables, we refer
readers to RS (2002) and also Spirtes and Richardson
(1996).

Y

X

W

V

Figure 3: A discriminating path for V : the triple
hW, V, Y i is ”discriminated” to be a collider here.
Discriminating paths behave similarly to unshielded
triples in that if p = hX, · · · , W, V, Y i is discriminating
for V , then hW, V, Y i is a (shielded) collider (See Figure 3) if and only if every set that m-separates X and
Y does not contain V ; it is a non-collider if and only if
every set that m-separates X and Y contains V . The
following is proved in Spirtes and Richardson (1996).
Proposition 1. Two MAGs over the same set of vertices are Markov equivalent if and only if
(e1) They have the same adjacencies;

ZHANG
(e2) They have the same unshielded colliders;
(e3) If a path p is a discriminating path for a vertex
Y in both graphs, then Y is a collider on the path
in one graph if and only if it is a collider on the
path in the other.
2.3

PARTIAL ANCESTRAL GRAPHS

Given a MAG G, we denote its Markov equivalence
class, the set of MAGs Markov equivalent to G, by [G].
An edge mark in G is said to be invariant if the mark
is the same in all members of [G].
Definition 7 (PAG). Given a MAG G, the partial
ancestral graph (PAG) for [G], PG , is a graph with
(possibly) three kinds of edge marks: arrowheads, tails,
and circles (and hence six kinds of edges: −−, →, ↔,
◦−−, ◦−−◦, ◦→), such that
i. PG has the same adjacencies as G (and hence any
member of [G]) does;
ii. A mark of arrowhead is in PG if and only if it is
invariant in [G]; and

453

that change some circles into arrowheads or tails. In
light of (e2) in Proposition 1, we first mark unshielded
colliders.
R0 For every unshielded triple of vertices hα, β, γi, if
it is an unshielded collider in G, then orient the
triple as α∗→ β ←∗γ.
(∗ is a meta-symbol that serves as a wildcard for edge
marks.) The soundness of R0 is obvious given Proposition 1. That is, after we apply R0 to P, all resulting
arrowheads are invariant. In general, however, there
are more invariant arrowheads. The following rules are
sufficient to identify all:
R1 If α∗→ β ◦−∗ γ, and α and γ are not adjacent,
then orient the triple as α∗→ β → γ.
R2 If α → β∗→ γ or α∗→ β → γ, and α ∗−◦ γ, then
orient α ∗−◦ γ as α∗→ γ.
R3 If α∗→ β ←∗γ, α ∗−◦ θ ◦−∗ γ, α and γ are not
adjacent, and θ ∗−◦β, then orient θ ∗−◦β as θ∗→ β.

iii. A mark of tail is in PG if and only if it is invariant
in [G].1

R4 If p = hθ, ..., α, β, γi is a discriminating path between θ and γ for β, and β ◦−∗ γ; then if β → γ
appears in G, orient β ◦−∗ γ as β → γ; otherwise
orient the triple hα, β, γi as α ↔ β ↔ γ.

The mark of circle is obviously intended to represent
an edge mark that is not invariant. We will henceforth
use partial mixed graphs (PMGs) to refer to graphs
that may contain circles. Earlier definitions of PAGs
in the literature (e.g., Spirtes et al. 1997) do not require PAGs to reveal all invariant marks. Ali et al.
(2005) used what is called joined graphs to represent
[G]. However, a joined graph represents only invariant arrowheads and does not distinguish invariant tails
from variant marks.2 Clearly the most informative
representation of a Markov equivalence class of MAGs
is the PAG as defined here. The question is how to
construct PG from G.

R1 − R3 are essentially Meek’s orientation rules in
the context of DAGs (Meek 1995). R4 makes use of
discriminating paths, and is peculiar to MAGs with
bi-directed edges. R0 − R4 are equivalent to the set
of orientation rules given in Ali et al. (2005), except that the latter is formulated in the framework
of Joined Graphs which do not distinguish between
tails and circles. The results in Ali et al. (2005) entail
that R0 − R4 are sound and complete for constructing
invariant arrowheads (also see Zhang 2006, Theorem
3.2.1 and Theorem 3.3.1).

4
3

ARROWHEAD COMPLETE
ORIENTATION RULES

To construct PG , we start with a graph P that has
the same adjacencies as G and no informative marks
but circles.3 Then we apply a set of orientation rules
1
Zhang (2006) uses the name complete or maximally
oriented PAGs. We will simply call them PAGs in this
paper.
2
Basically we get the joined graph for [G] by turning all
circles in the PAG into tails.
3
The adjacencies can be constructed even if we are not
given a MAG, but instead given a set of independence facts.
See Spirtes et al. (1999). Similar comments apply to R0
and R4 below.

TAIL COMPLETENESS

Let PF CI 4 be the graph resulting from an exhaustive
application of R0 − R4 to P. In general, PF CI is not
yet the PAG of [G]. In other words, although PF CI reveals all invariant arrowheads and some invariant tails
(due to R1 and R4), some circles therein may hide
invariant tails. The goal of the present paper is to
supply more tail orientation rules to construct PG , the
PAG of [G].
To introduce the extra tail orientation rules, we need
a couple of definitions.
4

We call it PF CI because R0 − R4 are essentially the
rules used in the FCI algorithm given in Spirtes et al.
(1999).

454

ZHANG

Definition 8 (uncovered path). In a PMG, a path
p = hV0 , · · · , Vn i is said to be uncovered if for every
1 ≤ i ≤ n − 1, Vi−1 and Vi+1 are not adjacent, i.e.,
every consecutive triple on the path is unshielded.
Definition 9 (potentially directed path). In a
PMG, a path p = hV0 , · · · , Vn i is said to be potentially directed (abbreviated as p.d.) from V0 to Vn
if for every 0 ≤ i ≤ n − 1, the edge between Vi and
Vi+1 is not into Vi or out of Vi+1 .
Intuitively, a p.d. path is one that could be oriented
into a directed path by changing the circles on the
path into appropriate tails or arrowheads. As we shall
see, uncovered p.d. paths play an important role in
locating invariant tails. A special case of a p.d. path
is where every edge on the path is of the form ◦−−◦.
We call such a path a circle path.
Here is the first block of additional rules:
R5 For every (remaining) α ◦−−◦β, if there is an uncovered circle path p = hα, γ, · · · , θ, βi between α
and β s.t. α, θ are not adjacent and β, γ are not
adjacent, then orient α ◦−−◦β and every edge on p
as undirected edges (−−).
R6 If α −−β ◦−−∗γ (α and γ may or may not be
adjacent), then orient β ◦−−∗γ as β −−∗ γ.
R7 If α −−◦ β ◦−−∗γ, and α, γ are not adjacent, then
orient β ◦−−∗γ as β −−∗ γ.

That is why we introduce these three rules as a block.
Only when there are undirected edges in G do we need
to include R5 − R7. Recall that undirected edges are
motivated by the need to represent selection effects.
So if there is no issue of selection bias, we would only
consider MAGs with directed and bi-directed edges, in
which case R5 − R7 can be ignored. The next block
of rules, by contrast, may still be applicable.
R8 If α → β → γ or α −−◦ β → γ, and α◦→ γ, orient
α◦→ γ as α → γ.
R9 If α◦→ γ, and p = hα, β, θ, · · · , γi is an uncovered
p.d. path from α to γ such that γ and β are not
adjacent, then orient α◦→ γ as α → γ.
R10 Suppose α◦→ γ, β → γ ← θ, p1 is an uncovered
p.d. path from α to β, and p2 is an uncovered p.d.
path from α to θ. Let µ be the vertex adjacent
to α on p1 (µ could be β), and ω be the vertex
adjacent to α on p2 (ω could be θ). If µ and ω are
distinct, and are not adjacent, then orient α◦→ γ
as α → γ.
These rules are visualized in Figure 5. All of them are
about turning partially directed edges ◦→ into directed
ones →, which are valuable for the sake of causal inference because ↔ and → represent different causal
information (see Richardson and Spirtes 2003).
α

The pictorial illustrations of R5 − R7 are given in Figure 4. These rules are related to undirected edges. R5
lead to undirected edges, and R6 depend on undirected
edges. So if the given MAG G does not contain undirected edges, these two are not needed. In that case,
moreover, R7 will not get triggered at all, because neither R0 − R4 introduced earlier nor R8 − R10 to be
introduced shortly can lead to −−◦ edges, which are in
the antecedent of R7.

α

γ

β

γ

β
α

α

γ

β

γ

β

R8
β
θ

β

β

θ

υ

α
α

α

γ

β

υ

γ

γ

α

γ

ω

ω

θ

θ

R9
R10

α

β

α

β

R5

β

α

α

α

∗γ
R6

β

Figure 5: Graphical illustrations of R8 − R10

∗γ

β

α

∗γ

β

R7

Figure 4: Graphical illustrations of R5 − R7

∗γ

There are obviously cases in which the additional rules
are applicable. For example, given the MAG in Figure
6(a), R0−R4 will give us the graph in 6(b), which miss
some invariant tails, but we can apply R9 to get them,
as shown in 6(c). In fact, it is not hard to construct
cases to show that all the extra rules given above except possibly R8 are necessary. (We do not yet know
if R8 is really needed.)

ZHANG
A

A

C

B

B

of R5 applies here.

A

C

C

B

D

D

D

(a)

(b)

(c)

455

Figure 6: An example where R9 is needed
So in general R0 − R4 are not able to pick out all invariant tails. Our main result is that R5 − R10 are
sufficient for that purpose. Let PAF CI (AFCI denotes
”Augmented FCI”) be the graph resulting from an exhaustive application of R5 − R10 to PF CI . Here is the
main theorem:
Main Theorem PAF CI = PG . In other words, R0 −
R10 are sound and complete for identifying invariant
edge marks in G.
Unfortunately, the current proof of the theorem is way
too long to present here. We can only explain the main
steps of the argument, and refer interested readers to
the full proof in Zhang (2006, chapter 4).
First, the soundness of R5 − R10 is not hard to show.
Lemma 1. R5 − R10 are sound.
Proof. For each rule, we just need to show that any
mixed graph that violates the rule does not belong to
[G].
R5: Note that the antecedent of this rule implies that
hα, γ, · · · , θ, β, αi forms an uncovered cycle that consists of ◦−−◦ edges. Suppose a mixed graph, contrary
to what the rule requires, has an arrowhead on this
cycle. In light of R1, the cycle must be oriented as a
directed cycle to avoid unshielded colliders not in G.
But then the graph is not ancestral.
R6: if any graph, contrary to what the rule requires,
contains α −−β ←∗γ, the graph is not ancestral.
R7: Suppose a mixed graph, contrary to what the rule
requires, has an arrowhead at β on the edge between β
and γ. Then either α−−β ←∗γ is present, in which case
the graph is not ancestral; or α → β ←∗γ is present, in
which case the graph contains an unshielded collider
not in G.
R8: This rule is analogous to R2. Obviously if a mixed
graph, contrary to what the rule requires, contains
α ↔ γ, then either an almost directed cycle is present
or there is an arrowhead into an undirected edge, and
hence the graph is not ancestral.
R9: The essentially same argument for the soundness

R10: The antecedent of the rule implies that the triple
hµ, α, ωi is not a collider in G, which means at least one
of the two edges involved in the triple is out of α in any
MAG in [G]. Suppose a graph in [G], contrary to what
the rule requires, contains α ↔ γ. Then the edge(s)
out of α must be a directed edge for the graph to be
ancestral. It follows that either p1 or p2 is a directed
path in the graph to avoid unshielded colliders not in
GT . In either case, α is an ancestor of γ, and hence
the graph is not ancestral, a contradiction.
Completeness is much harder. We need to show that
for every circle in PAF CI , there is a MAG in [G] in
which the corresponding mark is an arrowhead, and
there is one in [G] in which the corresponding mark
is a tail. The latter is of course taken care of by the
arrowhead completeness result. To show the former,
the following lemma is needed.
Lemma 2. The following properties hold of PAF CI :
P1 for any three vertices A, B, C, if A∗→ B ◦−−∗C,
then there is an edge between A and C with an
arrowhead at C, namely, A∗→ C. Furthermore,
if the edge between A and B is A → B, then the
edge between A and C is either A → C or A◦→ C
(i.e., it is not A ↔ C).
P2 For any two vertices A, B, if A −−◦ B, then there
is no edge into A or B.
P3 if A −−◦ B ◦−−◦C, then A −−◦ C; if A −−◦ B◦→ C,
then A → C or A◦→ C.
P4 There is no such cycle as A−−◦B −−◦C −−◦· · ·−−◦A.
Proof Sketch: P1 is analogous to Lemma 1 of Meek
(1995). It is related to R0−R4, and is the key property
needed to prove arrowhead completeness. See Lemma
4.1 of Ali et al. (2005) and Lemma 3.3.1 of Zhang
(2006). P2−P4 are related to R5−R7. The basic idea
is to show that R5 − R7 cannot lead to configurations
violating P2 − P4. See proofs of Lemmas 4.3.1, 4.3.3
and 4.3.4 in Zhang (2006).
c
Let the circle component of PAF CI , denoted by PAF
CI ,
be the subgraph of PAF CI consisting of all ◦−−◦ edges
in PAF CI .
c
c
Lemma 3. For any edge A ◦−−◦B in PAF
CI , PAF CI
can be oriented into a DAG with no unshielded colliders in which A → B appears.

Proof Sketch: Given Lemma 5 in Meek (1995), it sufc
fices to show that PAF
CI is chordal. And it is easy
c
to show, given properties P1 and P3, that if PAF
CI

456

ZHANG

is non-chordal, then there is a chordless cycle consisting of ◦−−◦ edges in PAF CI , which should have been
oriented by R5.
Properties P1 − P4 are very useful in proving the following important fact:
Lemma 4. Let H be the graph resulting from the following procedure applied to PAF CI :
(1) Orient the circles on ◦→ edges in PAF CI as tails,
and orient the circles on −−◦ edges in PAF CI as
arrowheads (that is, turn all ◦→ edges and all −−◦
edges into directed edges →); and
(2) orient PAF CI into a DAG with no unshielded colliders.
Then H is a MAG and is Markov equivalent to G.
Proof Sketch: P1 ensures that turning ◦ → into →
will not create configurations in violation of conditions
(a1)-(a2) in Definition 1 or an inducing path in violation of maximality. P2 and P3 ensure that after turning −−◦ into →, P1 still holds. P4 ensures that no
directed cycle would result from turning −−◦ into →.
P1 then ensures that no matter how one orient a ◦−−◦
edge, no directed cycle or unshielded collider that involves already existing arrowheads would be created.
Given all these, it is relatively easy to check that H
satisfies the definition of MAG, and satisfies the conditions in Proposition 1 with G.
Lemma 4 has a couple of important implications.
First, together with Lemma 3, it implies that for any
circle on a −−◦ edge or a ◦−−◦ edge in PAF CI , there
is a member in [G] in which the corresponding mark is
an arrowhead. Hence, no circle on −−◦ or ◦−−◦ edges
in PAF CI corresponds to an invariant tail. Second, it
is clear that no extra undirected edges or bi-directed
edges are introduced in constructing H in Lemma 4.
This means that in any Markov equivalence class of
MAGs, there is a representative in which all undirected edges and bi-directed edges are invariant. This
fact was used in Zhang and Spirtes (2005) to establish
a transformational characterization of Markov equivalence between directed MAGs. Moreover, a MAG with
the fewest number of undirected edges and bi-directed
edges is probably easier to fit, in light of the fact that
UGs are harder to fit than DAGs and the results presented in Drton and Richardson (2004). Lemma 4
gives a simple way of constructing such a representative from a PAG. By contrast, the algorithm given
in Ali et al. (2005) does not construct a representative
with the fewest undirected edges.

What is left to show is that every circle on a ◦→ edge
also corresponds to an arrowhead in some member of
[G]. (In other words, R8 − R10 have picked up all
invariant tails that were hidden in ◦→ edges.) This
turns out to be the most difficult step. The space
here only permits us to give a very rough skeleton of
the proof. The basic strategy consists of two major
steps. Let J◦→ K be an arbitrary ◦→ edge in PAF CI .
c
In the first step, we show that we can orient PAF
CI
— the circle component of PAF CI — into a DAG with
no unshielded colliders that satisfies certain conditions
c
relative to J◦→ K. This DAG orientation of PAF
CI
together with operation (1) in Lemma 4 yield a MAG
Markov equivalent to G.
In the second step, we make use of a result on
equivalence-preserving mark changes presented in
Zhang and Spirtes (2005) and Tian (2005), and argue
that the particular MAG constructed in the first step
can be transformed into a MAG containing J ↔ K
through a sequence of equivalence-preserving changes
of → into ↔. (The conditions put down in the first
c
step for the DAG orientation of PAF
CI play a crucial
role in proving this.) It then follows that the resulting MAG with J ↔ K is also Markov equivalent to G,
which gives us what we need.
The first step does most of the work, and also occupies
most of the proof. In particular, the constraints (defined relative to an edge J◦→ K) on the DAG orientac
tion of PAF
CI are quite complicated, and it takes a lot
of effort to show they can indeed by satisfied. Again,
interested readers have to consult Zhang (2006) for the
details, which we hope to simplify soon. Here we will
just state the result.
Lemma 5. For every J◦→ K in PAF CI , there is a
MAG in [G] in which the edge appears as J ↔ K.
This follows immediately from Corollary 4.3.33 in
Zhang (2006). Our main theorem follows from Lemmas 1, 4, 5 and the arrowhead completeness result.

5

CONCLUSION

We have provided a characterization of Markov equivalence classes for MAGs — which are well suited to
represent DAGs with latent confounders and/or selection variables — in the style of Meek (1995)’s characterization for DAGs. The characterization is by way
of a set of orientation rules that are sound and complete for constructing commonalities among MAGs in
a Markov equivalence class. We also showed how to
construct a representative MAG with fewest number
of undirected edges and bi-directed edges from a PAG,
which is potentially useful for scoring PAGs in scorebased PAG search.

ZHANG
Our results are directly relevant to the constraintbased approach to causal discovery in the presence of
latent confounders and selection variables. As mentioned in footnote 4, the FCI algorithm (Spirtes et al.
1999), which takes an oracle of conditional independence facts as input, essentially makes use of R0 − R4
(replacing the references to the given MAG with references to the oracle) in the orientation stage. Whether
FCI is complete has been an open problem for a while.
We now know that if the oracle is reliable, the FCI
algorithm, as it stands, outputs a partial mixed graph
that reveals all invariant arrowheads but not all invariant tails in the true causal MAG. Augmented by the
additional rules given in this paper, the FCI algorithm
becomes complete.
This completeness result is significant because under
the causal interpretation of MAGs (Richardson and
Spirtes 2003), tails can represent important qualitative
causal information. Roughly, A → B in a MAG means
that A is a cause of B or a cause of a hidden selection
variable. This becomes particularly informative when
selection effect is known to be absent, in which case
A → B means that A has a causal influence on B.5 By
contrast, if it is only known that there is an arrowhead
at B but not known whether the mark at A is a tail,
all one can say is that B is not a cause of A.
The orientation rules fall naturally into three blocks.
R0 − R4 are arrowhead complete. So if one only cares
about invariant arrowheads, the other rules can be ignored. R5 − R7 are related only to undirected edges,
or the presence of selection bias. They are not needed
if, as is often the case, one worries about latent confounding but not selection bias. Finally, R8 − R10
may give us more directed causal arrows.
Acknowledgement
I thank Peter Spirtes and Thomas Richardson for
checking the proofs in Zhang (2006).
References
Ali, R.A., T. Richardson, P. Spirtes and J. Zhang
(2005) Towards Characterizing Markov Equivalence
Classes for Directed Acyclic Graphs with Latent Variables, Proceedings of the 21th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, AUAI Press, pp.10-17.
Andersson, S., D. Madigan, and M. Pearlman (1997)
A Characterization of Markov Equivalence Classes of
Acyclic Digraphs, in Ann. Statist. 25(2): 505-541.
Chickering, D.M. (1995) A transformational charac5

Though it is compatible with there also being a latent common cause of A and B. Thanks to an anonymous
referee for emphasizing this point.

457

terization of equivalent Bayesian network structures,
in Proceedings of Eleventh Conference on Uncertainty
in Artificial Intelligence, 87-98. Morgan Kaufmann.
Drton, M., and T. Richardson (2003). Iterative Conditional Fitting for Gaussian Ancestral Graph Models.
Department of Statistics, University of Washington,
Tech Report 437.
Drton, M., and T. Richardson (2004) Graphical Answers to Questions About Likelihood Inference in
Gaussian Covariance Models. Department of Statistics, University of Washington, Tech Report 467.
Meek, C. (1995) Causal Inference and Causal Explanation with Background Knowledge. Proceedings of
the Eleventh Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
Intelligence, 403-411. Morgan Kaufmann.
Richardson, T. (1998) Chain Graphs and Symmetric
Associations, in Learning in Graphical Models, Ed. M.
Jordan, Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Richardson, T., and P. Spirtes (2002) Ancestral Graph
Markov Models, in Ann. Statist. 30(4): 962-1030.
Richardson, T., and P. Spirtes (2003) Causal Inference via Ancestral Graph Models, in Highly Structured
Stochastic Systems. Eds. P. Green, N. Hjort, and S.
Richardson. Oxford University Press.
Spirtes, P., and T. Richardson (1996) A Polynomial
Time Algorithm For Determining DAG Equivalence in
the Presence of Latent Variables and Selection Bias,
in Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on
Artificial Intelligence and Statistics.
Spirtes, P., C. Meek, and T. Richardson (1999) An Algorithm for Causal Inference in the Presence of Latent
Variables and Selection Bias, in Computation, Causation, and Discovery. Eds. C. Glymour and G.F.
Cooper. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tian, J. (2005) Generating Markov Equivalent Maximal Ancestral Graphs by Single Edge Replacement, in
Proceedings of the 21th Conference on Uncertainty in
Artificial Intelligence, AUAI Press, pp. 591-598.
Verma, T., and J. Pearl (1990) Equivalence and Synthesis of Causal Models, in Proceedings of 6th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 220-227.
Zhang, J. (2006) Causal Inference and Reasoning in
Causally Insufficient Systems. PhD dissertation, Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University,
available at www.hss.caltech.edu/jiji/dissertation.pdf.
Zhang, J., and P. Spirtes (2005) A Transformational
Characterization of Markov Equivalence for Directed
Acyclic Graphs with Latent Variables, in Proceedings
of the 21th Conference on UAI, pp.667-674.

