with Bayesian methods, since they can be incorporated as
prior information and then implemented at the inference
level via Bayes’ theorem. In this paper, we recognize that
Bayesian nonparametric methods have an important role to
play in first-order probabilistic inference as well. We start
with a simple example that introduces some concepts necessary to understanding the main points of the paper.
Consider a variation of the problem explored in [11]. You
have just gone to the candy store and have bought a box
of Smarties (or M&Ms), and you would like to discover
how many colours there are (while avoiding the temptation
to eat them!). Even though there is an infinite number of
colours to choose from, the candies are coloured from a finite set. Due to the manufacturing process, Smarties may
be slightly discoloured. You would like to discover the unknown (true) set of colours by randomly picking Smarties
from the box and observing their colours. After a certain
number of draws, you would like to answer questions such
as: How many different colours are in the box? Do two
Smarties have the same colour? What is the probability
that the first candy you select from a new box is a colour
you have never seen before?
The graphical representation of the BLOG model is shown
in Fig. 1a. The number of Smarties of different colours,
n(Smartie), is chosen from a Poisson distribution with

it is unreasonable to expect a domain expert to implement
nonparametrics considering the degree of effort required
to grasp these abstract notions. We show that Bayesian
nonparametrics lead to sophisticated representations that
can be easier to implement than their parametric counterparts. We formulate a language that allows one to specify
nonparametric models in an intuitive manner, while hiding
complicated implementation details from the user. Sec. 3
formalizes our proposed language extension as a set of
rules that map code to a nonparametric generative process.
We emphasize that NP-BLOG is an extension to the BLOG
language, so it retains all the functionality specified in [11].

Figure 1: (a) The BLOG and (b) NP-BLOG graphical models for counting Smarties. The latter implements a Dirichlet
process mixture. The shaded nodes are observations.
mean γSmartie . A colour for each Smartie s is drawn
from the distribution HColourDist . Then, for every draw d,
zSmartieDrawn [d] is drawn uniformly from the set of Smarties {1, . . . , n(Smartie)}. Finally, we sample the observed,
noisy colour of each draw conditioned on zSmartieDrawn [d]
and the true colours of the Smarties.
The NP-BLOG model for the same setting is shown in
Fig. 1b. The true colours of an infinite sequence of Smarties s are sampled from HColourDist . πSmartie is a distribution over the choice of coloured Smarties, and is sampled from a uniform Dirichlet distribution with parameter
αSmartie . Once the Smarties and their colours are generated, the true Smartie for draw d, represented by the indicator zSmartieDrawn [d] = s, is sampled from the distribution
of Smarties πSmartie . The last step is to sample the observed
colour, which remains the same as in the BLOG model.
One advantage of the NP-BLOG model is that it determines
a posterior over the number of Smarties colours without
having to specify a prior over n(Smartie). This is important since this prior is difficult to specify in many domains.
A more significant advantage is that NP-BLOG explicitly
models a distribution over the collection of Smarties. This
is not an improvement in expressiveness — one can always
reverse engineer a parametric model given a target nonparametric model in a specific setting. Rather, nonparametrics
facilitate the resolution of queries on unbounded sets, such
as the colours of Smarties. This plays a key role in making inference tractable in sophisticated models with object
properties that are themselves unbounded collections of objects. This is the case with the citation matching model in
Sec. 3.1, in which publications have collections of authors.
The skeptic might still say, despite these advantages, that

We focus on an important class of nonparametric methods,
the Dirichlet process (DP), because it handles distributions
over unbounded sets of objects as long as the objects themselves are infinitely exchangeable, a notion formalized in
Sec. 3.4. The nonparametric nature of DPs makes them
suitable for solving model selection problems that arise
in the face of identity uncertainty and unknown numbers
of objects. Understanding the Dirichlet process is integral to understanding NP-BLOG, so we devote a section
to it. Sec. 3.5 shows how DPs can characterize collections of objects. Models based on DPs have been shown
to be capable of solving a variety of difficult tasks, such
as topic-document retrieval [2, 21]. Provided the necessary
expert knowledge, our approach can attack these applications, and others. We conduct a citation matching experiment in Sec. 4, demonstrating accurate and efficient probabilistic inference in a real-world problem.

2

Dirichlet processes

A Dirichlet process G | α, H ∼ DP (α, H), with parameter
α and base measure H, is the unique probability measure
defined G on the space of all probability measures (Φ, B),
where Φ is the sample space, satisfying
(G(β1 ), ..., G(βK)) ∼ Dirichlet(αH(β1 ), ..., αH(βK)) (1)
for every measurable partition β1 , . . . , βK of Φ. The base
measure H defines the expectation of each partition, and α
is a precision parameter. One can consider the DP as a generalization of the Dirichlet distribution to infinite spaces.
In Sec. 3.4, we formalize exchangeability of unknown objects. In order to explain the connection between exchangeability and the DP, it is instructive to construct DPs with
the Pólya urn scheme [5]. Consider an urn with balls of
K possible colours, in which the probability of the first
ball being colour k is given by Hk . We draw a ball
from the urn, observe its colour φ1 , then return it to the
urn along with another ball of the same colour. We then
make another draw, observing its colour with probability
p(φ2 = k|φ1 ) = (αHk +δ(α1 = k))/(α+1). After N observations, the colour of the next ball is distributed as
αHk
+
P (φN +1 = k|φ1:N ) =
α+N

PN

δ(φi = k)
.
α+N

i=1

(2)

The marginal P (φ1:N ) of this process, obtained by applying the chain rule to successive predictive distributions, can
be shown to satisfy the infinite mixture representation
!
Z
K
PN
Y
δ(φ
=k)
i
P (φ1:N ) =
DPα,H (dπ), (3)
πk i=1
M(Φ) k=1

where the πk are multinomial success rates of each colour
k. This result, a manifestation of de Finetti’s theorem, establishes the existence and uniqueness of the DP prior for
the Pólya urn scheme [5]. In the Pólya urn setting, observations φi are infinitely exchangeable and independently
distributed given the measure G. Thus, what we have established here in a somewhat cursory fashion is the appropriateness of the DP for the case when the observations φi
are infinitely exchangeable.
Analogously, if the urn allows for infinitely many colours,
then for any measurable interval β of Φ we have
p(φN +1 ∈ β|φ1:N ) =

N
1 X
αH(β)
+
δ(φi ∈ β).
α+N
α + N i=1

The first term in this expansion corresponds to prior knowledge and the second term corresponds to the empirical distribution. Larger values of α indicate more confidence
in the prior H. Note that, as N increases, most of the
colours will be repeated. Asymptotically, one ends up sampling colours from a possibly large but finite set of colours,
achieving a clustering effect. Nonetheless, there is always
some probability of generating a new cluster.
DPs are essential building blocks in our formulation of nonparametric first-order logic. In the literature, these blocks
are used to construct more flexible models, such as DP mixtures and hierarchical or nested DPs [2, 21]. Since observations are provably discrete, DP mixtures add an additional
layer xi ∼ P (xi |φi ) in order to model continuous draws xi
from discrete mixture components φi .
In the Pólya urn scheme, G is integrated out and the φi ’s are
sampled directly from H. Most algorithms for sampling
DPs are based on this scheme [2, 13, 21]. In the hierarchies
constructed by our language, however, we rely on an explicit representation of the measure G since it is not clear
we can always integrate it out, even when the measures
are conjugate. This compels us to use the stick-breaking
construction [19], which establishes that i.i.d. sequences
wk ∼ Beta(1, α) and φk ∼ H can be used
P∞to construct
the equivalent empirical distribution G = k=1 πk δ(φk ),
Qk−1
where the stick-breaking weights πk = wk j=1 (1 − wj )
and can be shown to sum to unity. We abbreviate the sampling of the weights as πk ∼ Stick(α). This shows that G
is an infinite sum of discrete values. The DP mixture due
to the stick-breaking construction is
φi | H ∼ H
zi | π ∼ π

π | α ∼ Stick(α)
xi | φi , zi ∼ p(xi |φzi ),

(4)

where zi = k indicates that sample xi belongs to component k. The Smarties model (Fig. 1b) is in fact an example
of a DP mixture, where the unbounded set of colours is Φ.
By grounding on the support of the observations, the true
number of colours K is finite. At the same time, the DP
mixture is open about seeing new colours as new Smarties
are drawn. In NP-BLOG, the unknown objects are the mixture components.
NP-BLOG semantics (Sec. 3) define arbitrary hierarchies
of Dirichlet process mixtures. By the stick-breaking construction (4), every random variable xi has a countable set
of ancestors (the unknown objects), hence DP mixtures preserve the well-definedness of BLOG models.
To infer the hidden variables of our models, we employ
the efficient blocked Gibbs sampling algorithm developed
in [7] as one of the steps in the overall Gibbs sampler. One
complication in inference stems from the fact that a product
of Dirichlets is difficult to simulate. Teh et al. [21] provide
a solution using an auxiliary variable sampling scheme.

3

Syntax and semantics

This section formalizes the NP-BLOG language by specifying a procedure that takes a set of statements LΨ in the
language and returns a model Ψ. A model comprises a set
of types, function symbols, and a distribution over possible
worlds ω ∈ ΩΨ . We underline that our language retains all
the functionality of BLOG. Unknown objects must be infinitely exchangeable, but this trivially the case in BLOG.
Sec. 3.4 elaborates on this.
We illustrate the concepts introduced in this section with
an application to citation matching. Even though our citation matching model doesn’t touch upon all the interesting
aspects of NP-BLOG, the reader will hopefully find it instrumental in understanding the semantics.
3.1 Citation matching
One of the main challenges in developing an automated citation matching system is the resolution of identity uncertainty: for each citation, we would like to recover its true
title and authors. For instance, the following citations from
the CiteSeer database probably refer to the same paper:
Kozierok, Robin, and Maes, Pattie, A Learning Interface Agent
for Meeting Scheduling, Proceedings of the 1993 International
Workshop on Intelligent user Interfaces, ACM Press, NY.
R. Kozierok and P. Maes. A learning interface agent for
scheduling meetings. In W. D. Gray, W. E. Heey, and D. Murray, editors, Proc. of the Internation al Workshop on Intelligent
User Interfaces, Orlando FL, New York, 1993. ACM Press.

Even after assuming the title and author strings have been
segmented into separate fields (an open research problem
itself!), citation matching still exhibits serious challenges:
two different strings may refer to the same author (e.g.
J.F.G. de Freitas and Nando de Freitas) and, conversely,
the same string may refer to different authors (e.g. David
Lowe in vision and David Lowe in quantum field theory).

01 type Author; type Pub; type Citation;
02 guaranteed Citation;
03 #Author ∼ NumAuthorsDist();
04 #Pub ∼ NumPubsDist();
05 Name(a) ∼ NameDist();
06 Title(p) ∼ TitleDist();
07 NumAuthors(p) ∼ NumAuthorsDist();
08 RefAuthor(p, i) if Less(i, NumAuthors(p))
then ∼ Uniform(Author a);
09 RefPub(c) ∼ Uniform(Pub p);
10 CitedTitle(c) ∼ TitleStrDist(Title(RefPub(c)));
11 CitedName(c, i) if Less(i, NumAuthors(RefPub(c)))
then ∼ NameStrDist(Name(RefAuthor(RefPub(c), i)));

Figure 2: BLOG model for citation matching [10].
01 type Author; type Pub;
02 type Citation; type AuthorMention;
03 guaranteed Citation; guaranteed AuthorMention;
04 Name(a) ∼ NameDist{};
05 Title(p) ∼ TitleDist{};
06 CitedTitle(c) ∼ TitleStrDist{Title(RefPub(c))};
07 RefAuthor(u) ∼ PubAuthorsDist(RefPub(CitedIn(u)));
08 CitedName(u) ∼ NameStrDist{Name(RefAuthor(u))};

Figure 3: NP-BLOG model for citation matching.
There are a number of different approaches to this problem.
Pasula et al. incorporate unknown objects and identity uncertainty into a probabilistic relational model [14]. Wellner
et al. resolve identity uncertainty by computing the optimal graph partition in a conditional random field [22]. We
elaborate on the BLOG model presented in [10] in order to
contrast it with the one we propose. The BLOG model is
shown in Fig. 2 with cosmetic modifications and the function declaration statements omitted.
The BLOG model describes a generative sampling process.
Line 1 declares the object types, and line 2 declares that
the citations are guaranteed (hence are not generated by a
number statement). Lines 3 and 4 are number statements,
and lines 5-11 are dependency statements; their combination defines a generative process. The process starts by
choosing a certain number of authors and publications from
their respective prior distributions. Then it samples author names, publication titles and the number of authors
per publication. For each author string i in a citation, we
choose the referring author from the set of authors. Finally,
the properties of the citation objects are chosen. For example, generating an interpretation of CitedTitle(c) for citation
c requires values for RefPub(c) and estimates of publication
titles. TitleStrDist(s) can be interpreted as a measure that
adds noise in the form of perturbations to input string s.
The NP-BLOG model in Fig. 3 follows a similar generative
approach, the key differences being that it samples collections of unknown objects from DPs, and it allows for uncertainty in the order of authors in publications. But what
do we gain by implementing nonparametrics? The advan-

Figure 4: Three representations of lines 5-6 in Fig. 3: as
an NP-BLOG program, as a generative process, and as a
graphical model. Darker, hatched nodes are fixed or generated from other lines and shaded nodes are observed. Note
the similarity between the graphical model and Fig. 1b.
Lines 5-6 describe a DP mixture (4) over the publications
p, where the base measure is φTitleDist , πTitle is the hidden
distribution over publication objects, the indicators are the
true publications zRefPub [c] corresponding to the citations c,
and the continuous observations are the titles φCitedTitle [c].
tage lies in the ability to capture sophisticated models of
unbounded sets of objects in a high-level fashion, and the
relative ease of conducting inference, since nonparametrics
can deal gracefully with the problem of model selection.
One can view a model such as the automatic citation
matcher from three perspectives: it is a set of statements
in the language that comprise a program; from a statistician’s point of view, the model is a process that samples
the defined random variables; and from the perspective of
machine learning, it is a graphical model. Fig. 3 interprets
lines 5-6 of Fig. 4 in three different ways. The semantics,
as we will see, formally unify all three perspectives.
Both BLOG and NP-BLOG can answer the following
queries: Is the referring publication of citation c the same
as the referring publication of citation d? How many authors are there in the given citation database? What are
the names of the authors of the publication referenced by
citation c? How many publications contain the author a,
where a is one of the authors in the publication referenced
by citation c? And what are the titles of those publications?
However, only NP-BLOG can easily answer the following
query: what group of researchers do we expect to be authors in a future, unseen publication?
3.2 Objects and function symbols
This section is largely devoted to defining notation so that
we can properly elaborate on NP-BLOG semantics in Sections 3.3 to 3.5. The notation as it appears in these sections
makes the connection with both first-order logic and the
Dirichlet process mixture presented in Sec. 2.

The set of objects of a type τ is called the extension of
τ , and is denoted by [τ ]. In BLOG, extensions associated
with unknown (non-guaranteed) types can vary over possible worlds ω, so we sometimes write [τ ]ω . The size of [τ ]ω
is denoted by nω (τ ).1 Note that objects may be unknown
even if there is a fixed number of them. Guaranteed objects
are present in all possible worlds. We denote ΩΨ to be the
set of possible worlds for model Ψ.
A model introduces a set of function symbols indexed by
the objects. For conciseness, we treat predicates as Boolean
functions and constants as zero-ary functions. For example, the citation matching model (Fig. 3) has the function
symbols Name and CitedTitle, among others, so there is a
Name(a) for every author a and CitedTitle(c) for every citation c. By assigning numbers to objects as they are generated, we can consider logical variables a and c to be indices
on the set of natural numbers. Since BLOG is a typed language, the range of interpretations of a function symbol f
is specified by its type signature. For example, the interpretation of RefAuthor(u), for each u ∈ [AuthorMention] =
{1, 2, . . . , n(AuthorMention)}, takes a value on the range
[Author]. Likewise, Title(p) ranges over the set of strings
[String]. Figures 2 and 3 omit function declaration statements, which specify type signatures. Nonetheless, this
should not prevent the reader from deducing the type signatures of the functions via the statements that generate them.
Nonparametric priors define distributions over probability
measures, so we need function symbols that uniformly refer to them. Letting X and Y be object domains (e.g.
X = [Author]), we define MD (X | Y) to be the set of conditional probability densities p(x ∈ X | y ∈ Y) following
the class of parameterizations D. We can extend this logic,
denoting MD′ (MD (X | Y) | Z) to be the set of probability
measures p(d ∈ D | z ∈ Z) over the choice of parameterizations d ∈ D, conditioned on Z. And so on. For peace of
mind, we assume each class of distributions D is defined on
a measurable σ-field and the densities are integrable over
the range of the sample space. Note that Y or Z, but not
X , may be a Cartesian product over sets of objects. BLOG
does not allow return types that are tuples of objects, so
we restrict distributions of objects accordingly. One can
extend the above reasoning to accommodate distributions
over multiple unknown objects by adopting slightly more
general notation involving products of sets of objects.
We assign symbols to all the functions defined in the language LΨ . For instance, the range of NameDist in Fig. 3
is M([String]) for some specified parameterization class.
Since NameDist is not generated in another line, it must
be fixed over all possible worlds. For each publication p,
the interpretation of symbol PubAuthorsDist(p) is assigned
a value on the space MMultinomial ([Author]). That is, the
1
Even though the DP imposes a distribution over an infinite set
of unknown objects, nω (τ ) is still finite since it refers to the estimated number of objects in ω. n(τ ) corresponds to the random
variables of the DP mixture, as explained in Sec. 3.5.

function symbol refers to a distribution over author objects.
How the model chooses the success rate parameters for this
multinomial distribution, given that it is not on the left side
of any generating statement, is the subject of Sec. 3.5.
NP-BLOG integrates first-order logic with Bayesian nonparametric methods, but we have left out one piece of the
puzzle: how to specify distributions such as NameDist, or
classes of distributions. This is an important design decision, but an implementation level detail, so we postpone it
to future work. For the time being, one can think of parameterizations as object classes in a programming language
such as Java that generate samples of the appropriate type.
We point out that there is already an established language
for constructing hierarchical Bayesian models, BUGS [20].
The truth of any first-order sentence is determined by a
possible world in the corresponding language. A possible
world ω ∈ ΩΨ consists of an extension [τ ]ω for each type τ
and an interpretation for each function symbol f . Sec. 3.5
details how NP-BLOG specifies a distribution over ΩΨ .
3.3 Dependency statements for known objects
The dependency statement is the key ingredient in the specification of a generative process. We have already seen several examples of dependency statements, and we formalize
them here. It is well explained in [11], but we need to extend the definition in the context of nonparametrics.
In BLOG, a dependency statement looks like
f (x1 , . . . , xL ) ∼ g(t1 , . . . , tN );

(5)

where f is a function symbol, x1 , . . . , xL is a tuple of
logical variables representing arguments to the function,
g is a probability density conditioned on the arguments
t1 , . . . , tN , which are terms or formulae in the language
LΨ in which the logical variables x1 , . . . , xL may appear.
The dependency statement carries out a generative process. For an example, let’s look at the dependency statement on line 10 of Fig. 2. Following the rules of semantics [11], line 10 generates assignments for random variables φCitedTitle [c], for c = 1, . . . , n(Citation), from probability density g conditioned on values for zRefPub [c] and
φTitle [p], for all p = 1, . . . , n(Pub). As in [11], we use
square brackets to index random variables, instead of the
statistics convention of using subscripts.
In NP-BLOG, the probability density g is itself a function
symbol, and the dependency statement is given by
f (x1 , . . . , xL ) ∼ g(t1 , . . . , tM ){tM +1 , . . . , tM +N }; (6)
where f and g are function symbols, and t1 , . . . , tM +N
are formulae of the language as in (5). For this to be a
valid statement, g(t1 , . . . , tM ) must be defined on the range
M(X | Y), where X is the range of f (x1 , . . . , xL ) and Y is
the domain of the input arguments within the curly braces.
The first M terms inside the parentheses are evaluated in
possible world ω, and their resulting values determine the

choice of measure g. The terms inside the curly braces
are evaluated in ω and the resulting values are passed to
distribution g(t1 , . . . , tM ). When all the logical variables
x1 , . . . , xL refer to guaranteed objects, the semantics of the
dependency statement are given by [11]. The curly brace
notation is used to disambiguate the two roles of input argument variables. The arguments inside parentheses are
indices to function symbols (e.g. the c in RefPub(c) in
Fig. 3), whereas the arguments inside curly braces serve
as input to probability densities (e.g. the term inside the
curly braces in TitleStrDist{Title(RefPub(c))}). This new
notation is necessary when a distribution takes both types
of arguments. We don’t have such an example in citation
matching, so we borrow one from an NP-BLOG model in
the aircraft tracking domain:2
State(a, t) if t = 0 then ∼ InitState{}
else ∼ StateTransDist(a){State(a, t − 1)};

The state of the aircraft a at time t is an R6Vector object
which stores the aircraft’s position and velocity in space.
When t > 0, the state is generated from the transition distribution of aircraft a given the state at the previous time
step. StateTransDist(a) corresponds to a measure on the
space M([R6Vector] | [R6Vector]).
For example, in line 6 of Fig. 3, the citation objects are
guaranteed. Following the rules of semantics, line 6 defines
a random variable φCitedTitle [c] corresponding to the interpretation of function symbol CitedTitle(c) for every citation
c. Given assignments to φTitleStrDist , zRefPub [c] (we use z
to be consistent with the notation of the semantics used in
this paper, although it makes no difference in BLOG) and
φTitle [p] for all p ∈ [Pub] — assignments that are either
observed or generated from other statements — the dependency statement defines the generative process
φCitedTitle [c] ∼ φTitleStrDist (φTitle [p]) s.t. p = zRefPub [c].
BLOG allows for contingencies in dependency statements.
These can be subsumed within our formal
framework
by defining a new measure φ′ (c, t) =
P
i δ(ci )φi (ti,1 , ti,2 , . . .), where δ(·) is the indicator function, ci is the condition i which must be satisfied in order to
sample from the density φi , c and t are the complete sets of
terms and conditions, and the summation is over the number of clauses. Infinite contingencies and their connection
to graphical models are discussed in [12].
3.4 Exchangeability and unknown objects
Unknown objects are precisely those which are not guaranteed. In this section, we formalize some important properties of generated objects in BLOG. We adopt the notion
of exchangeability [1] to objects in probabilistic first-order
logic. We start with some standard definitions.
2

In which aircraft in flight appear as blips on a radar screen,
and the objectives are to infer the number of aircraft and their
flight paths and to resolve identity uncertainty, arising because
a blip might not represent any aircraft or, conversely, an aircraft
might produce multiple detections [10].

Definition 1. The random variables x1 , . . . , xN are
(finitely) exchangeable under probability density function
p if p satisfies p(x1 , . . . , xN ) = p(xπ(1) , . . . , xπ(N ) ) for
all permutations π on {1, . . . , N } [1].
When n is finite, the concept of exchangeability is intuitive:
the ordering is irrelevant since possible worlds are equally
likely. The next definition extends exchangeability to unbounded sequences of random variables.
Definition 2. The random variables x1 , x2 , . . . are infinitely exchangeable if every finite subset is finitely exchangeable [1].
Exchangeability is useful for reasoning about distributions
over properties on sets of objects in BLOG. From Definitions 1 and 2, we have the following result.
Proposition 1. It is possible to define g in the dependency
statements (5) and (6) such that the sequence of objects
x1 , . . . , xL is finitely exchangeable if and only if the terms
t1 , . . . , tM +N do not contain any statements referring to a
particular xl .
For example, the distribution of hair colours of two people,
Eric and Mike, is not exchangeable given evidence that Eric
is the father of Mike. What about sequences of objects such
as time? As long as we do not set the predecessor function
beforehand, any sequence is legally exchangeable.
In this paper, models are restricted to infinitely exchangeable unknown objects. We can interpret this presupposition
this way: if we reorder a sequence of objects, then their
probability remains the same. If we add another object to
the sequence at some arbitrary position, both the original
and new sequence with one more object are exchangeable.
We can then appeal to de Finetti’s theorem (3), and hence
the Dirichlet process. Therefore, the order of unknown objects is not important, and we can reason about set of objects rather than sequences. While there are many domains
in which one would like to infer the presence of objects
that are not infinitely exchangeable, this constraint leaves
us open to modeling a wide range of interesting domains.
Unknown or non-guaranteed objects are assigned non-rigid
designators; a symbol in different possible worlds does not
necessarily refer to the same object, and so it does not
make sense to assign it a rigid label. This consideration
imposes a constraint: we can only refer to a publication
p via a guaranteed object, such as a citation c that refers
to it. While we cannot form a query that addresses a specific unknown object, or a subset of unknown objects, we
can pose questions about publications using existential and
universal quantifiers (resolved using Skolemization, for instance). We could ask, for instance, how many publications
have three or more authors.
3.5 Dependency statements for unknown objects
Sec. 3.2 formalized the notion of type extensions and function symbols in NP-BLOG programs. Sec. 3.3 served up
the preliminaries of syntax and semantics in dependency

statements. The remaining step to complete the full prescription of the semantics as a mapping from the language
LΨ to a distribution over possible worlds. This is accomplished by constructing a Bayesian hierarchical model over
random variables {φ, n, γ}, such that the set of random
variables φ is in one-to-one correspondence with the set of
function interpretations, n refers to the sizes of the type extensions,
and γ is a set of auxiliary random variables such
R
that p(φ, n, γ)dγ = p(φ, n). One might wonder why we
don’t dispense of function symbols entirely and instead describe everything using random variables, as in [18]. The
principal reason is to establish the connection with firstorder logic. Also, we want to make it clear that some random variables do not map to any individual in the domain.
What follows is a procedural definition of the semantics.
We now define distributions over the random variables, and
their mapping to the symbols of the first-order logic.
In order to define the rules of semantics, we collect dependency and number statements according to their input
argument types. If the collection of statements includes
a number statement, then the rules of semantics are given
in [11]. Otherwise, we describe how the objects and their
properties are implicitly drawn from a DP. Consider a set of
K dependency statements such that the generated functions
f1 , . . . , fK all require a single input of type υ, and [υ]ω can
vary over possible worlds ω. We denote x to be the logical
variable that ranges over [υ]. (The output types of the fk ’s
are not important.) The K dependency statements look like
f1 (x) ∼ g1 (t1,1 , . . . , t1,M1 ){t1,M1 +1 , . . . , t1,M1 +N1 };
..
..
(7)
.
.
fK (x) ∼ gK (tK,1 , ..., tK,MK){tK,MK+1 , ..., tK,MK+NK};
where Mk and Nk are the number of input arguments to
gk (·) and gk {·}, respectively, and tk,i is a formula in the
language in which x may appear. As in BLOG, each fk (x)
is associated with a random variable φfk [x]. The random
variables φg1 , . . . , φgK , including all those implicated in
the terms, must have been generated by other lines or are
observed. Overloading the notation, we define the terms
tk,i to be random variables that depend deterministically
on other generated or observed random variables. The set
of statements (7) defines the generative process
πυ ∼ Stick(αυ )
(8)
φfk [x] ∼ φgk [tk,1 , ..., tk,Mk ](tk,Mk+1 , ..., tk,Mk+Nk ), (9)
for k = 1, . . . , K, x = 1, . . . , ∞, where αυ is the userdefined DP concentration parameter and πυ is a multinomial distribution such that each success rate parameter πυ,x
determines the probability of choosing a particular object
x. NP-BLOG infers a distribution π over objects of type
υ following the condition of infinite exchangeability. For
example, applying rules (8,9) to line 4 of Fig. 3, we get
πAuthor ∼ Stick(αAuthor )
φName [a] ∼ φNameDist , for a = 1, . . . , ∞

If an object type does not have any dependency or number
statements, then no distribution over its extension is introduced (e.g. strings in the citation matching model).
The implementation of the DP brings about an important
subtlety: if x takes on a possibly infinite different set of values, how do we recover the true number of objects n(τ )?
The idea is to introduce a bijection from the subset of positive natural numbers that consists only of active objects to
the set {1, . . . , n(τ )}. An object is active in possible world
ω if and only if at least one random variable is assigned to
that object in ω. In the above example, n(Author) is the
number of author objects that are mentioned in the citations. Of course, in practice we do not sample an infinite
series of random variables φName [a].
If we declare a function symbol f with a return type τ ranging over a set of unknown objects, then there exists the default generating process
zf [x] ∼ πτ .

(10)

We use zf [x] instead of φf [x] to show that the random variables are the indicators of the DP mixture (4). For example,
each zRefPub [c] in line 6 in Fig. 3 is independently drawn
from the distribution of publications πPub . We can view
line 6 as constructing a portion of the hierarchical model,
as shown in Fig. 4. The number of publications n(Pub) is
set to the number of different values assigned to zRefPub [c].
NP-BLOG allows for the definition of a symbol f that corresponds to a multinomial distribution over [τ ], so its range
is MMultinomial ([τ ]). It exhibits the default prior
φf [x] ∼ Dirichlet(αf πτ ),

(11)

analogous to (10). αf is a user-defined scalar. We define
nf [x] to be the true number of objects associated with collection f (x). This is useful for modeling collections of objects such as the authors of a publication. Applying rules
(8,9,11) to the statements in Fig. 3 involving publication
objects, we arrive at the generative process
πPub ∼ Stick(αPub )
φTitle [p] ∼ φTitleDist , for p = 1, . . . , n(Pub)
φPubAuthorsDist [p] ∼ Dirichlet(αPubAuthorsDist πAuthor ) .
Most of the corresponding graphical model is shown in
Fig. 4. Only the φPubAuthorsDist [p]’s are missing, and
they are shown in Fig. 5. The true number of authors
nPubAuthorsDist [p] in publication p comes from the support
of all random variables that refer to it, and n(Pub) is determined by nPubAuthorsDist . While this paper focuses on the
Dirichlet process, our framework allows for other classes
of nonparametric distributions. One example can be found
in the aircraft tracking domain from Sec. 3.2, in which the
generation of aircraft transition tables might be specified
with the statement StateTransDist(a) ∼ StateTransPrior{}.
In both cases (10) and (11), one can override the defaults
by including appropriate dependency statements for f , in

Num. citations
Num. papers
Phrase matching
RPM+MCMC
CRF-Seg (N = 9)
NP-BLOG

Figure 5: The white nodes are the portion of the graphical
model generated in lines 7 and 8 of Fig. 3. See Fig. 4 for
an explanation of the darkened nodes.
which case we get φf [x] ∼ φg , following rule (9). For example, lines 7 and 8 in Fig. 3 specify the generative process
for the author mention objects,
zRefAuthor [u] ∼ φPubAuthorsDist [p]
φCitedName [u] ∼ φNameStrDist (φName [a]) ,
s.t. p = zRefPub [c], c = φCitedIn [u], a = zRefAuthor [u].
Fig. 5 shows the equivalent graphical model.
The generative process (8,9) is a stick-breaking construction over the unknown objects and their attributes. When
the objects x range over the set of natural numbers, (8,9) is
equivalent to the Dirichlet process
Gυ ∼ DP (αυ , Hυ,1 × · · · × Hυ,K ) ,
(12)
P∞
where Gυ , x=1 πυ,x δ(φf1 [x]) × · · · × δ(φfK [x]), and
Hυ,k is the base measure over the assignments to φfk , defined by gk conditioned on the terms tk,1 , . . . , tk,Mk +Nk .
Since BLOG is a typed, free language, we need to allow
for the null assignment to φf [x] when it is implicitly drawn
from πτ in (10). We permit the clause
f (x) ∼ if cond then null;

(13)

which defines φf [x] ∼ δ(null)δ(cond) + πτ (1 − δ(cond)).
This statement is necessary to take care of the situation
when an object’s source can be of different types, as in the
aircraft tracking domain with false alarms [10].
Next, we briefly describe how to extend the rules of semantics to functions with multiple input arguments. Let’s
consider the case of two inputs with an additional logical
variable y ∈ [ν]. Handling an additional input argument
associated with known (guaranteed) objects is easy. We
just duplicate (8,9) for every instance of y in the guaranteed type extension. This is equivalent to adding a finite
series of plates in the graphical model. Otherwise, we assume the unknown objects are drawn independently. That
is, π(υ,ν) = πυ πν . Multiple unknown objects as input does
cause some superficial complications with the interpretation of (8,9) as a DP, principally because we need to define
new notation for products of measures over different types.

Face Reinforce. Reason. Constraint
349
406
514
295
246
149
301
204
0.94
0.79
0.86
0.89
0.97
0.94
0.96
0.93
0.97
0.94
0.94
0.95
0.93
0.84
0.89
0.86

Table 1: Citation matching results for the Phrase Matching [9], RPM [14], CRF-Seg [22] and NP-BLOG models.
Performance is measured by counting the number of publication clusters that are recovered perfectly. The NP-BLOG
column reports an average over 1000 samples.
The DP determines an implicit distribution of unknown, infinitely exchangeable objects according to their properties.
That is, the DP distinguishes unknown objects solely by
their attributes. However, this is not always desirable —
for instance, despite being unable to differentiate the individual pieces, we know a chess board always has eight
black pawns. This is precisely why we retain the original
number statement syntax of BLOG which allows the user
to specify a prior over the number of unknown objects, independent of their properties. In the future, we would like
to experiment with priors that straddle these two extremes.
This could possibly be accomplished by setting a prior on
the Dirichlet concentration parameter, α.
By tracing the rules of semantics, one should see that only
thing the citation matching model does not generate is values for CitedIn(u). Therefore, they must be observed. We
can also provide observations from any number of object
attributes, such as CitedTitle(c) and CitedName(u), which
would result in unsupervised learning. By modifying the
set of evidence, one can also achieve supervised or semisupervised learning. Moreover, the language can capture both generative and discriminative models, depending
whether or not the observations are generated.
To summarize, the rules given by (7-11,13), combined
with the number statement [11], construct a distribution
p(φ, z, n, γ) such that the set of auxiliary variables is
γ = {π, α}, {φ, z} is in one-to-one correspondence with
the interpretations of the function symbols, the n are the
sizes of the [τ ], and an assignment to {φ, z, n} completely
determines the possible world ω ∈ Ω. The rules of semantics assemble models that are arbitrary hierarchies of DPs.

4

Experiment

The purpose of this experiment is to show that the NPBLOG language we have described realizes probabilistic
inference on a real-world problem. We simulate the citation matching model in Fig. 3 on the CiteSeer data set [9],
which consists of manually segmented citations from four
research areas in AI.
We use Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) to simulate
possible worlds from the model posterior given evidence in
the form of cited authors and titles. Sec. 2 briefly describes

There is much future work on this topic. An important direction is the development of efficient, flexible and on-line
inference methods for hierarchies of Dirichlet processes.

Figure 6: Estimated (solid blue) and true (dashed red line)
number of publications for the Face and Reasoning data.

Acknowledgements
This paper wouldn’t have happened without the help of
Brian Milch. Special thanks to Gareth Peters and Mike
Klaas for their assistance, and to the reviewers for their
time and effort in providing us with constructive comments.

References

Figure 7: Estimated distribution of the hidden number of
authors for the Face and Reasoning data sets.
the inference engine. Table 1 compares the performance
of the NP-BLOG model to [14, 22] and the greedy agglomerative clustering method [9] (implemented by [14]).
We achieve respectable matching accuracy, even though the
specification of the model requires only a few lines in NPBLOG, implements naive string metrics (the Jaro metric
for author surnames and the standard TF-IDF information
retrieval metric for distances between titles), and requires
no supervision. By comparison, [22] uses as many as 9 different citation fields, and [14] tunes the parameters of the
distributions using an alternate, labeled data set. (These
richer attributes, with the exception of the random field implemented in [22], could be incorporated into NP-BLOG.)
Since the segmented data is not publicly available, the our
version of the data might be slightly different. Our NPBLOG Gibbs sampling scheme is efficient; we found 1000
iterations was more than sufficient for data sets with as
many as 500 exemplars. We caution, however, that determining a suitable stopping point for the Markov chain is, at
the present state of research, more an art than a science.
In Figures 6 and 7, we plot the Monte Carlo estimate of
the numbers of publication and author clusters for two data
sets. The posteriors over the number of publications are
highly peaked, and they closely match the ground truth.

5

Conclusions

This paper presented novel semantics for modeling collections of objects and their properties in arbitrary hierarchies
by extending the BLOG probabilistic first-order language.
We demonstrated that NP-BLOG models complex domains
while concealing many implementation details from the
user. We adopted Bayesian nonparametric methods, and
notably Dirichlet processes, for defining distributions over
collections of infinitely exchangeable unknown objects and
their properties. Significantly, Dirichlet processes cohesively and efficiently handle model selection of unbounded
sets of objects in first-order probabilistic inference.

[1] J. M. Bernardo and A. F. M. Smith. Bayesian Theory. 1994.
[2] D. Blei, T. Griffiths, M. Jordan, and J. Tenenbaum. Hierarchical topic models and the nested Chinese restaurant process. NIPS, 16, 2003.
[3] P. Domingos and M. Richardson. Markov Logic: a unifying framework for statistical relational learning. In ICML
Workshop on Statistical Relational Learning, 2004.
[4] L. Getoor, N. Friedman, D. Koller, and A. Pfeffer. Learning probabilistic relational models. In Dzeroski and Lavrac,
editors, Relational Data Mining. 2001.
[5] J. K. Ghosh and R. V. Ramamoorthi. Bayesian Nonparametrics. Springer, 2003.
[6] D. Heckerman, C. Meek, and D. Koller. Probabilistic models for relational data. Technical report, MSR, 2004.
[7] H. Ishwaran and L. F. James. Gibbs sampling methods for
stick-breaking priors. J. Amer. Stat. Assoc., 96, 2001.
[8] M. Jaeger. Relational Bayesian networks: a survey. Electronic Articles in Comp. and Info. Sci., 6, 2002.
[9] S. Lawrence, C. L. Giles, and K. Bollacker. Digital libraries
and autonomous citation indexing. IEEE Computer, 32:67–
71, 1999.
[10] B. Milch, B. Marthi, and S. Russell. BLOG: Relational
modeling with unknown objects. In ICML Workshop on Statistical Relational Learning, 2004.
[11] B. Milch, B. Marthi, S. Russell, D. Sontag, D. L. Ong, and
A. Kolobov. BLOG: Probabilistic models with unknown objects. In IJCAI, 2005.
[12] B. Milch, B. Marthi, D. Sontag, S. Russell, D. L. Ong, and
A. Kolobov. Approximate inference for infinite contingent
Bayesian networks. In AI-Stats, 2005.
[13] R. M. Neal. Markov chain sampling methods for Dirichlet
process mixture models. J. Comput. Graph. Stat., 9, 2000.
[14] H. Pasula, B. Marthi, B. Milch, S. Russell, and I. Shpitser.
Identity uncertainty and citation matching. In NIPS, 2003.
[15] H. Pasula and S. Russell. Approximate inference for firstorder probabilistic languages. In IJCAI, 2001.
[16] A. Pfeffer. IBAL: An Integrated Bayesian agent language.
In IJCAI, 2001.
[17] D. Poole. Probabilistic horn abduction and Bayesian networks. Artificial Intelligence, 64(1):81–129, 1993.
[18] D. Poole. First-order probabilistic inference. IJCAI, 2003.
[19] J. Sethuraman. A Constructive definition of Dirichlet priors.
Statistica Sinica, 4:639–650, 1994.
[20] D. Spiegelhalter, A. Thomas, N. Best, and W. Gilks. BUGS
0.5: Bayesian inference using Gibbs sampling. Technical
report, Institute of Public Health, Cambridge, UK, 1996.
[21] Y. Teh, M. Jordan, M. Beal, and D. Blei. Hierarchical
Dirichlet processes. Technical report, Dept. of Statistics,
University of California at Berkeley, 2004.
[22] B. Wellner, A. McCallum, F. Peng, and M. Hay. An Integrated, conditional model of I.E. and coreference with application to citation matching. In UAI, 2004.

