Particle
Filtering
(RBPF) [Doucet et al., 2000].
We therefore extend
these algorithms to accommodate and exploit discrete
constraints in the presence of continuous probabilistic
functions. Extending Expectation Propagation to handle
constraints is easy, extension to continuous variables is a
little more intricate but still straightforward. The presence
of constraints introduces a principles challenge for Sequential Importance Sampling algorithms, however. Indeed the
main algorithmic contribution of this paper in presenting
a class of Rao-Blackwellised Particle Filtering algorithm,
IJGP-RBPF for HDMNs which integrates a Generalized
Belief Propagation component with a Rao-Blackwellised
Particle Filtering scheme.

1 INTRODUCTION
Modeling sequential real-life domains often requires the
ability to represent both probabilistic and deterministic information. Hybrid Dynamic Bayesian Networks (HDBNs)
were recently proposed for modeling such phenomena
[Lerner, 2002]. In essence, these are factored representation of Markov processes that allow discrete and continuous variables. Since they are designed to express uncertain
information they represent constraints as probabilistic entities which may have negative computational consequences.
To address this problem [Dechter and Mateescu, 2004,
Larkin and Dechter, 2003] introduced the framework of
Mixed Networks. In this paper we extend the Mixed Networks framework to dynamic environments, allow continuous Gaussian variables, yielding Hybrid Dynamic Mixed
Networks (HDMN). We address the algorithmic issues that
emerge from this extension and demonstrate the potential

Our motivation for developing HDMNs as a modeling
framework is a range of problems in the transportation literature that depend upon reliable estimates of the prevailing demand for travel over various time scales. At one
end of this range, there is a pressing need for accurate
and complete estimation of the global origins and destinations (O-D) matrix at any given time for an entire urban
area. Such estimates are used in both urban planning applications [Sherali et al., 2003] and integrated traffic control systems based upon dynamic traffic assignment techniques [Peeta and Zilaskopoulos, 2001]. Even the most advanced techniques, however, are hamstrung by their reliance upon out-dated, pencil-and-paper travel surveys and
sparsely distributed detectors in the transportation system.
We view the increasing proliferation of powerful mobile
computing devices as an opportunity to remedy this situation. If even a small sample of the traveling public
agreed to collect their travel data and make that data publicly available, transportation management systems could
significantly improve their operational efficiency. At the

other end of the spectrum, personal traffic assistants running on the mobile devices could help travelers replan their
travel when the routes they typically use are impacted by
failures in the system arising from accidents or natural disasters. A common starting point for these problems is to
develop an efficient formulation for learning and inferring
individual traveler routines like traveler’s destination and
his route to destination from raw data points.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next
section, we discuss preliminaries and introduce our modeling framework. We then describe two approximate inference algorithms for processing HDMN queries: an Expectation Propagation type and a Particle Filtering type.
Subsequently, we describe the transportation modeling approach and present preliminary empirical results on how
effectively a model is learnt and how accurately its predictions are given several models and a few variants of the
relevant algorithms.
We view the contribution of this paper in addressing a complex and highly relevant real life domain using a general
framework and domain independent algorithms, thus allowing systematic study of modeling, learning and inference in a non-trivial setting.

2 PRELIMINARIES AND DEFINITIONS
Hybrid Bayesian Networks (HBN) [Lauritzen, 1992] are
graphical models defined by a tuple B = (X, G, P), where X
is the set of variables
partitioned into discrete and continuS
ous ones X = Γ ∆, respectively, G is a directed acyclic
graph whose nodes corresponds to the variables. P =
{P1 , ..., Pn } is a set of conditional probability distributions
(CPDs). Given variable xi and its parents in the graph
pa(xi ), Pi = P(xi |pa(xi )). The graph structure G is restricted in that continuous variables cannot have discrete
variables as their child nodes. The conditional distribution of continuous variables are given by a linear Gaussian
model: P(xi |I = i, Z = z) = N(α(i) + β(i) ∗ z, γ(i))xi ∈ Γ
where Z and I are the set of continuous and discrete parents
of xi , respectively and N(µ, σ) is a multi-variate normal distribution. The network represents a joint distribution over
all its variables given by a product of all its CPDs.
A Constraint Network [Dechter, 2003] is a graphical model
R = (X, D,C), where X = {x1 , . . . , xn } is the set of variables, D = {D1 , . . . , Dn } is their respective discrete domains and C = {C1 ,C2 , . . . ,Cm } is the set of constraints.
Each constraint Ci is a relation Ri defined over a subset of
the variables Si ⊆ X and denotes the combination of values that can be assigned simultaneously. A Solution is an
assignment of values to all the variables such that no constraint is violated. The primary query is to decide if the
constraint network is consistent and if so find one or all
solutions.

The recently proposed Mixed Network framework [Dechter and Mateescu, 2004] for augmenting
Bayesian Networks with constraints, can immediately be
applied to HBNs yielding the Hybrid Mixed Networks
(HMNs). Formally, given a HBN B = (X, G, P) that
expresses the joint probability PB and given a constraint
network R = (X, D,C) that expresses a set of solutions ρ,
an HMN is a pair M = (B , R ). The discrete variables and
their domains are shared by B and R and the relationships
are those expressed in P and C. We assume that R is
consistent. The mixed network M = (B , R ) represents the
conditional probability PM (x) = PB (x|x ∈ ρ) i f x ∈ ρ and
0 otherwise.
Dynamic Bayesian Networks are Markov models whose
state-space and transition functions are expressed in a factored form using Bayesian Networks. They are defined by
a prior P(X0 ) and a state transition function P(Xt+1 |Xt ).
Hybrid Dynamic Bayesian Networks (HDBNs) allow continuous variables while Hybrid Dynamic Mixed Networks
(HDMNs) also permit explicit discrete constraints.
D EFINITION 2.1 A Hybrid Dynamic Mixed Network
(HDMN) is a pair (M0 , M→ ), defined over a set of variables X = {x1 , ..., xn }, where M0 is an HMN defined over
X representing P(X0 ). M→ is a 2-slice network defining
the stochastic process P(Xt+1 |Xt ). The 2-time-slice Hybrid
00
Mixed network (2-THMN) is an HMN defined over X 0 ∪ X
0
00
such that X and X are identical to X. The acyclic graph
0
of the probabilistic portion is restricted so that nodes in X
are root nodes and have no CPDs associated with them.
The constraints are defined the usual way. The 2-THMN
00
0
represents a conditional distribution P(X |X ).
The semantics of any dynamic network can be understood by unrolling the network to T time-slices. Namely,
T
P(X0:t ) = P(X0 ) ∗ ∏t=1
P(Xt |Xt−1 ) where each probabilistic component can be factored in the usual way, yielding a
regular HMN over T copies of the state variables.
The most common task over Dynamic Probabilistic Networks is filtering and prediction Filtering is the task of determining the belief state P(Xt |e0:t ) where Xt is the set of
variables at time t and e0:t are the observations accumulated
at time-slices 0 to t. Filtering can be accomplished in principle by unrolling the dynamic model and using any stateof-the art exact or approximate reasoning algorithm. The
join-tree-clustering algorithm is the most commonly used
algorithm for exact inference in Bayesian networks. It partitions the CPDs and constraints into clusters that interact
in a tree-like manner (the join-tree) and applies messagepassing between clusters. The complexity of the algorithm is exponential in a parameter called treewidth, which
is the maximum number of discrete variables in a cluster. However, the stochastic nature of Dynamic Networks
restricts the applicability of join-tree clustering considerably. In the discrete case the temporal structure implies

tree-width which equals to the number of state variables
that are connected with the next time-slice, thus making the
factored representation ineffective. Even worse, when both
continuous and discrete variables are present the effective
treewidth is O(T ) when T is the number of time slices, thus
making exact inference infeasible. Therefore the applicable approximate inference algorithms for Hybrid Dynamic
Networks are either sampling-based such as Particle Filtering or propagation-based such as Expectation Propagation.
In the next two sections, we will extend these algorithms to
HDMNs.

3 EXPECTATION PROPAGATION
In this section we extend an approximate inference algorithm called Expectation Propagation
(EP) [Heskes and Zoeter, 2002] from HDBNs to HDMNs.
The idea in EP (forward pass) is to perform Belief Propagation by passing messages between slices t and t + 1
along the ordering t = 0 to T . EP can be thought of as
an extension of Generalized Belief Propagation (GBP)
to HDBNs [Heskes and Zoeter, 2002]. For simplicity of
exposition, we will extend a GBP algorithm called Iterative
Join graph propagation [Dechter et al., 2002] to HDMNs
and call our technique IJGP(i)-S where ”S” denotes that
the process is sequential. The extension is rather straightforward and can be easily derived by integrating the results
in [Murphy, 2002, Dechter et al., 2002, Lauritzen, 1992,
Larkin and Dechter, 2003].
IJGP [Dechter et al., 2002] is a Generalized Belief Propagation algorithm which performs message passing on a
join-graph. A join-graph is collection of cliques or clusters
such that the interaction between the clusters is captured
by a graph. Each clique in a join-graph contains a subset
of variables from the graphical model. IJGP(i) is a parameterized algorithm which operates on a join-graph which
has less than i + 1 discrete variables in each clique. The
complexity of IJGP(i) is bounded exponentially by i , also
called the i-bound. In the message-passing step of IJGP(i),
a message is sent between any two nodes that are neighbors of each other in the join-graph. A message sent by
node Ni to N j is constructed by multiplying all the functions and messages in a node (except the message received
from N j ) and marginalizing on the common variables between N j and Ni (see [Dechter et al., 2002]).
IJGP(i) can be easily adapted to HDMNs (which we call
IJGP(i)-S) and we describe some technical details here
rather than a complete derivation due to lack of space. Note
that because we are performing online inference, we need
to construct the join-graph used by IJGP(i)-S in an online
manner rather than recomputing the join-graph every time
new evidence arrives. Murphy [Murphy, 2002] describes
a method to compute a join-tree in an online manner by
pasting together join-trees of individual time-slices using

special cliques called the interface. [Dechter et al., 2002]
describe a method to compute join-graphs from join-trees.
The two methods can be combined in a straightforward way
to come up with an online procedure for constructing a
join-graph. In this procedure, we split the interface into
smaller cliques such that the new cliques have less than
i + 1 variables. This construction procedure is shown in
Figure 1.
Message-passing is then performed in a sequential way as
follows. At each time-slice t, we perform message-passing
over nodes in t and the interface of t with t − 1 and t + 1
(shown by the ovals in Figure 1). The new functions computed in the interface of t with t + 1 are then used by t + 1,
when we perform message passing in t + 1.
Three important technical issues remain to be discussed.
First, message-passing requires the operations of multiplication and marginalization to be performed on functions
in each node. These operators can be constructed for
HDMNs in a straightforward way by combining the operators by [Lauritzen, 1992] and [Larkin and Dechter, 2003]
that work on HBNs and discrete mixed networks respectively. We will now briefly comment on how the multiplication operator can be derived. Let us assume we
want to multiply a collection of probabilistic functions P0
and a set of constraint relations C0 (which consist of only
discrete tuples allowed by the constraint) to form a single function PC. Here, multiplication can be performed
on the functions in P0 and C0 separately using the operators in [Lauritzen, 1992] and [Dechter, 2003] respectively
to compute a single probabilistic function P and a single
constraint relation C. These two functions P and C can be
multiplied by deleting all tuples in P that are not present in
C to form the required function PC.
Second, because IJGP(i)-S constructs join-graphs sequentially, the maximum-i-bound for IJGP(i)-S is bounded by
the treewidth of the time slice and its interfaces and not the
treewidth of the entire HDMN model (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: Schematic illustration of the Procedure used for
creating join-graphs and join-trees of HDMNs

Algorithm IJGP-RBPF
• Input: A Hybrid Dynamic Mixed Network (X, D, G, P,C)0:T and a observation sequence e0:T Integer N, w and i.
• Output: P(XT |e0:T )
• For t = 0 to T do
• Sequential Importance Sampling step:
1. Generalized Belief Propagation step
Use IJGP(i) to compute the proposal distribution Ωapp
2. Rao-Blackwellisation step
Partition the Variables Xt into Rt and Zt such that the treewidth of a join-tree of
Zt is w.
3. Sampling step
For i = 1 to N do
(a) Generate a Rti from Ωapp .
(b) reject sample if rti is not a solution. i=i-1;
(c) Compute the importance weights wti of Rti .
ci .
4. Normalize the importance weights to form w
t
• Selection step:
– Resample N samples from Rbti according to the normalized importance weights
ci to obtain new N random samples.
w
t

• Exact step:
– for i = 1 to N do
i , e , Rbi and
Use join-tree-clustering to compute the distribution on Zti given Zt−1
t t
d
i
R .
t−1

Figure 2: IJGP-RBPF for HDMNs
Third, IJGP(i) guarantees that the computations will be exact if i is equal to the treewidth. This is not true for IJGP(i)S in general as shown in [Lerner, 2002]. It can be proved
that:
T HEOREM 3.1 The complexity of IJGP(i)-S is O(((|∆t | +
n) ∗ d i ∗ Γt3 ) ∗ T ) where |∆t | is the number of discrete variables in time-slice t, d is the maximum-domain size of the
discrete variables, i is the i-bound used, n is the number
of nodes in a join-graph of the time-slice, Γt is the maximum number of continuous variables in the clique of the
join-graph used and T is the number of time-slices.

4 RAO-BLACKWELLISED PARTICLE
FILTERING
In this section, we will extend the Rao-Blackwellised Particle filtering algorithm [Doucet et al., 2000] from HDBNs
to HDMNs. Before, we present this extension, we will
briefly review Particle Filtering and Rao-Blackwellised
Particle Filtering (RBPF) for HDBNs.
Particle filtering uses a weighted set of samples or particles to approximate the filtering distribution. Thus, given
a set of particles Xt1 , . . . , XtN approximately distributed according to the target-filtering distribution P(Xt = M|e0:t ),
the filtering distribution is given by P(Xt = M|e0:t ) =
1/N ∑Ni=1 δ(Xti = M) where δ is the Dirac-delta function.
Since we cannot sample from P(Xt = M|e0:t ) directly, Parti-

cle filtering uses an appropriate (importance) proposal distribution Q(X) to sample from. The particle filter starts by
generating N particles according to an initial proposal distribution Q(X0 |e0 ). At each step, it generates the next state
i for each particle X i by sampling from Q(X
i
Xt+1
t+1 |Xt , e0:t ).
t
It then computes the weight of each particle based given by
wt = P(X)/Q(X) to compute a weighted distribution and
then re-samples from the weighted distribution to obtain a
set of un-biased or un-weighted particles.
Particle filtering often shows poor performance in highdimensional spaces and its performance can be improved
by sampling from a sub-space by using the RaoBlackwellisation (RB) theorem (and the particle filtering
is called Rao-Blackwellised Particle Filtering (RBPF)).
Specifically, the state Xt is divided into two-sets: Rt and
Zt such that only variables in set Rt are sampled (from a
proposal distribution Q(Rt ) ) while the distribution on Zt
is computed analytically given each sample on Rt (assuming that P(Zt |Rt , e0:t , Rt−1 ) is tractable). The complexity
of RBPF is proportional to the complexity of exact inference step i.e. computing P(Zt |Rt , e0:t , Rt−1 ) for each sample Rtk . w-cutset [Bidyuk and Dechter, 2004] is a parameterized way to select Rt such that the complexity of computing P(Zt |Rt , e0:t , Rt−1 ) is bounded exponentially by w. Below, we use the w-cutset idea to perform RBPF in HDMNs.
Since exact inference can be done in polynomial time if
a HDBN contains only continuous variables, a straightforward application of RBPF to HDBNs involves sampling
only the discrete variables in each time slice and exactly
inferring the continuous variables [Lerner, 2002].
Extending this idea to HDMNs, suggests that in each time
slice t we sample the discrete variables and discard all particles that violate the constraints in the time slice. Let us assume that we select a proposal distribution Q that is a good
approximation of the probabilistic filtering distribution but
ignores the constraint portion. The extension described
above can be inefficient because if the proposal distribution Q is such that it makes non-solutions to the constraint
portion highly probable, most samples from Q will be rejected (because these samples Rti will have P(Rti ) = 0 and
so the weight will be zero). Thus, on one extreme sampling
only from the Bayesian Network portion of each time-slice
may lead to potentially high rejection-rate.
On the other extreme, if we want to make the sample rejection rate zero we would have to use a proposal distribution Q0 such that all samples from this distribution
are solutions. One way to find this proposal distribution
is to make the constraint network backtrack-free (using
adaptive-consistency [Dechter, 2003] or exact constraint
propagation) along an ordering of variables and then sample along the reverse ordering. Another approach is to
use join-tree-clustering which combines probabilistic and
deterministic information and then sample from the join-

tree. However, both join-tree-clustering and adaptiveconsistency are time and space exponential in treewidth and
so they are costly when the treewidth is large. Thus on one
hand, zero-rejection rate implies using a potentially costly
inference procedure while on the other hand sampling from
a proposal distribution that ignores constraints may result
in a high rejection rate.
We propose to exploit the middle ground between the two
extremes by combining the constraint network and the
Bayesian Network into a single approximate distribution
Ωapp using IJGP(i) which is a bounded inference procedure. Note that because IJGP(i) has polynomial time complexity for constant i, we would not eliminate the samplerejection rate completely. However, by using IJGP(i) we
are more likely to reduce the rejection-rate because IJGP(i)
also achieves Constraint Propagation and it is well known
that Constraint Propagation removes many inconsistent
tuples thereby reducing the chance of sampling a nonsolution. [Dechter, 2003].
Another important advantage of using IJGP(i) is that
it yields very good approximations to the true posterior [Dechter et al., 2002] thereby proving to be an ideal
candidate for proposal distribution. Note that IJGP(i)
can be used as a proposal distribution because it can be
proved using results from [Dechter and Mateescu, 2003]
that IJGP(i) includes all supports of P(Xt |e0:t , Xt−1 ) (i.e.
P(Xt |e0:t , Xt−1 ) > 0 implies that the output of IJGP(i) viz.
Q > 0)
Note that IJGP(i) we use here is different from the algorithm IJGP(i)-S that we described in the previous section.
This is because in our RBPF procedure, we need to comk ,e )
pute an approximation to the distribution P(Rt |Rt−1
0:t
k
given the sample Rt−1
on variables Rt−1 and evidence e0:t .
IJGP(i) as used in our RBPF procedure works on HMNs
and can be derived using the results in [Dechter et al., 2002,
Lauritzen, 1992, Larkin and Dechter, 2003]. For lack of
space we do not describe the details of this algorithm (see a
companion paper [Gogate and Dechter, 2005] for details).
The integration of the ideas described above into a formal
algorithm called IJGP-RBPF is given in Figure 2. It uses
the same template as in [Doucet et al., 2000] and the only
step different in IJGP-RBPF from the original template is
the implementation of the Sequential Importance Sampling
step (SIS).
SIS is divided into three-steps: (1) In the Generalized
Belief Propagation step of SIS, we first perform Belief Propagation using IJGP(i) to form an approximation of the posterior (say Ωapp ) as described above.
(2) In the Rao-Blackwellisation step, we first partition the variables in a 2THMN into two sets Rt and
Zt using a method due to [Bidyuk and Dechter, 2004].
This method [Bidyuk and Dechter, 2004] removes minimal
variables Rt from Xt such that the treewidth of the remain-

Figure 3: Car Travel Activity model of an individual
ing network Zt is bounded by w. (3) In the sampling
step, the variables Rt are sampled from Ωapp . To generate a sample from Ωapp , we use a special data-structure
of ordered buckets which is described in a companion paper [Gogate and Dechter, 2005]. Importance weights are
computed as usual [Doucet et al., 2000].
Finally, the exact-step computes a distribution on Zt using join-tree-clustering for HMNs (see a companion paper [Gogate and Dechter, 2005] for details on join-treeclustering for HMNs). It can be proved that:
T HEOREM 4.1 The complexity of IJGP-RBPF(i,w) is
O([NR ∗ d w+1 + ((|∆| + n) ∗ (d i ∗ |Γ|3 ))] ∗ T ) where |∆| is
the number of discrete variables, d is the maximum-domain
size of the discrete variables, i is the adjusted-i-bound, w is
defined by w-cutset, n is the number of nodes in a joingraph, Γ is the number of continuous variables in a 2THMN, NR is the number of samples actually drawn and
T is the number of time-slices.

5

THE TRANSPORTATION MODEL

In this section, we describe the application of HDMNs to
a real-world problem of inferring car travel activity of individuals. The major query in our HDMN model is to predict where a traveler is likely to go and what his/her route
to the destination is likely to be, given the current location of the traveler’s car. This application was described
in [Liao et al., 2004] in a different context for detecting abnormal behavior in Alzheimer’s patients and they use a Abstract Hierarchical Markov Models (AHMM) for reasoning
about this problem. The novelty in our approach is not only
a more general modeling framework and approximate inference algorithms but also a domain independent implementation which allows an expert to add and test variants
of the model.
Figure 3 shows a HDMN model for modeling the car travel
activity of individuals. Note that the directed links express
the probabilistic relationships while the undirected (bold)

edges express the constraints.
We consider the roads as a Graph G(V, E) where the vertices V correspond to intersections while the edges E correspond to segments of roads between intersections. The
variables in the model are as follows. The variables dt and
wt represent the information about time-of-day and dayof-week respectively. dt is a discrete variable and has four
values (morning, a f ternoon, evening, night) while the variable wt has two values (weekend, weekday). Variable gt
represents the persons next goal (e.g. his office, home etc).
We consider a location where the person spends significant
amount of time as a proxy for a goal [Liao et al., 2004].
These locations are determined through a preprocessing
step by noting the locations in which the dwell-time is
greater than a threshold (15 minutes). Once such locations
are determined, we cluster those that are in close proximity
to simplify the goal set. A goal can be thought of as a set of
edges E1 ⊂ E in our graph representation. The route level
rt represents the route taken by the person to move from
one goal to other. We arbitrarily set the number of values
it can take to |gt |2 . The person’s location lt and velocity
vt are estimated from GPS reading yt . ft is a counter (essentially goal duration) that governs goal switching. The
Location lt is represented in the form of a two-tuple (a, w)
where a = (s1 , s2 ),a ∈ E and s1 , s2 ∈ V is an edge of the
map G(V, E) and w is a Gaussian whose mean is equal to
the distance between the person’s current position on a and
one of the intersections in a.
The probabilistic dependencies in the model are straightforward and can be found by tracing the arrows (see Figure 3). The constraints in the model are as follows. We
assume that a person switches his goal from one time slice
to another when he is near a goal or moving away from a
goal but not when he is on a goal location. We also allow a forced switch of goals when a specified maximum
time that he is supposed to spend at a goal is reached. This
is modeled by using a constant D. These assumptions of
switching between goals is modeled using the following
constraints between the current location, the current goal,
the next goal and the switching counters: (1)If lt−1 = gt−1
and Ft−1 = 0 Then Ft = D, (2) If lt−1 = gt−1 and Ft−1 > 0
Then Ft = Ft−1 − 1, (3) If lt−1 6= gt−1 and Ft−1 = 0 Then
Ft = 0 and (4) If lt−1 6= gt−1 and Ft−1 > 0 Then Ft = 0, (5)
If Ft−1 > 0 and Ft = 0 Then gt is given by P(gt |gt−1 ), (6) If
Ft−1 = 0and Ft = 0 Then gt is same as gt−1 , (7) If Ft−1 > 0
and Ft > 0 gt is same as gt−1 and (8) If Ft−1 = 0 and Ft > 0
gt is given by P(gt |gt−1 ).

6 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The test data consists of a log of GPS readings collected
by one of the authors. The test data was collected over
a six month period at intervals of 1-5 seconds each. The
data consist of the current time, date, location and veloc-

ity of the person’s travel. The location is given as latitude
and longitude pairs. The data was first divided into individual routes taken by the person and the HDMN model
was learned using the Monte Carlo version of the EM algorithm [Liao et al., 2004, Levine and Casella, 2001].
We used the first three months’ data as our training
set while the remaining data was used as a test set.
TIGER/Line files available from the US Census Bureau
formed the graph on which the data was snapped. As specified earlier our aim is two-fold: (a) Finding the destination
or goal of a person given the current location and (b) Finding the route taken by the person towards the destination or
goal.
To compare our inference and learning algorithms, we use
three HDMN models. Model-1 is the model shown in Figure 3. Model-2 is the model given in Figure 3 with the
variables wt and dt removed from each time-slice. Model3 is the base-model which tracks the person without any
high-level information and is constructed from Figure 3 by
removing the variables wt , dt , ft , gt and rt from each timeslice.
We used 4 inference algorithms. Since EM-learning uses
inference as a sub-step, we have 4 different learning algorithms. We call these algorithms as IJGP-S(1), IJGPS(2) and IJGP-RBPF(1,1,N) and IJGP-RBPF(1,2,N) respectively. Note that the algorithm IJGP-S(i) (described
in Section 3) uses i as the i-bound. IJGP-RBPF(i,w,N) (described in Section 4) uses i as the i-bound for IJGP(i), w as
the w-cutset bound and N is the number of particles at each
time slice. Three values of N were used: 100, 200 and 500.
For EM-learning, N was 500. Experiments were run on a
Pentium-4 2.4 GHz machine with 2G of RAM. Note that
for Model-1, we only use IJGP-RBPF(1,1) and IJGP(1)-S
because the maximum i-bound in this model is bounded by
1 (see section 3).
6.1 FINDING DESTINATION OR GOAL OF A
PERSON
The results for goal prediction with various combinations
of models, learning and inference algorithms are shown
in Tables 1, 2 and 3. We define prediction accuracy as
the number of goals predicted correctly. Learning was
performed offline. Our slowest learning algorithm based
on GBP-RBPF(1,2) used almost 5 days of CPU time for
Model-1, and almost 4 days for Model-2—significantly
less than the period over which the data was collected. The
column ’Time’ in Tables 1, 2 and 3 shows the time for inference algorithms in seconds while the other entries indicate
the accuracy for each combination of inference and learning algorithms.
In terms of which model yields the best accuracy, we can
see that Model-1 achieves the highest prediction accuracy

of 84% while Model-2 and Model-3 achieve prediction accuracies of 77% and 68% respectively or lower.
For Model-1, to verify which algorithm yields the best
learned model we see that IJGP-RBPF(1,2) and IJGP(2)S yield an accuracy of 83% and 81% respectively while
for Model-2, we see that the average accuracy of IJGPRBPF(1,2) and IJGP(2)-S was 76% and 75% respectively.
From these two results, we can see that IJGP-RBPF(1,2)
and IJGP(2)-S are the best performing learning algorithms.
For Model-1 and Model-2, to verify which algorithm yields
the best accuracy given a learned model, we see that
IJGP(2)-S is the most cost-effective alternative in terms
time versus accuracy while IJGP-RBPF yields the best accuracy.
Table 1: Goal-prediction: Model-1
N
100
100
200
200
500
500

Inference
IJGP-RBPF(1,1)
IJGP-RBPF(1,2)
IJGP-RBPF(1,1)
IJGP-RBPF(1,2)
IJGP-RBPF(1,1)
IJGP-RBPF(1,2)
IJGP(1)-S
IJGP(2)-S
Average

Time
12.3
15.8
33.2
60.3
123.4
200.12
9
34.3

LEARNING
IJGP-RBPF
IJGP-S
(1,1)
(1,2)
(1)
(2)
78
80
79
80
81
84
78
81
80
84
77
82
80
84
76
82
81
84
80
82
84
84
81
82
79
79
77
79
74
84
78
82
79.625
82.875
78.25
81.25

6.2 FINDING THE ROUTE TAKEN BY THE
PERSON
To see how our models predict a person’s route, we use
the following method. We first run our inference algorithm
on the learned model and predict the route that the person
is likely to take. We then super-impose this route on the
actual route taken by the person. We then count the number
of roads that were not taken by the person but were in the
predicted route i.e. the false positives, and also compute
the number of roads that were taken by the person but were
not in the actual route i.e. the false negatives. The two
measures are reported in Table 4 for the best performing
learning models in each category: viz GBP-RBPF(1,2) for
Model-1 and Model-2 and GBP-RBPF(1,1) for Model-3.
As we can see Model-1 and Model-2 have the best route
prediction accuracy (given by low false positives and false
negatives).

Table 3: Goal Prediction Model-3
N
100
200
500

Inference
IJGP-RBPF(1,1)
IJGP-RBPF(1,1)
IJGP-RBPF(1,1)
IJGP(1)-S
Average

Time
2.2
4.7
12.45
1.23

LEARNING
IJGP-RBPF(1,1)
IJGP(1)-S
68
61
67
64
68
63
66
62
67.25
62.5

7 RELATED WORK
[Liao et al., 2004] and [Patterson et al., 2003] describe a
model based on AHMEM [Bui, 2003] and Hierarchical
Markov Models (HMMs) respectively for inferring highlevel behavior from GPS-data. Our model goes beyond
their model by representing two new variables day-of-week
and time-of-day which improves the accuracy in our model
by about 6%.
A mixed network framework for representing deterministic and uncertain information was presented
in [Dechter and Larkin, 2001, Larkin and Dechter, 2003,
Dechter and Mateescu, 2004]. These previous works also
describe exact inference algorithms for mixed networks
with the restriction that all variables should be discrete.
Our work goes beyond these previous works in that we describe approximate inference algorithms for the mixed network framework, allow continuous Gaussian nodes with
certain restrictions in the mixed network framework and
model discrete-time stochastic processes. The approximate inference algorithms called IJGP(i) described in
[Dechter et al., 2002] handled only discrete variables. In
our work, we extend this algorithm to include Gaussian
variables and discrete constraints. We also develop a sequential version of this algorithm for dynamic models.
Particle Filtering is a very attractive research
area [Doucet et al., 2000]. Particle Filtering in HDMNs
can be inefficient if non-solutions of constraint portion
have high probability of being sampled. We show how
to alleviate this difficulty by performing IJGP(i) before
sampling. This algorithm IJGP-RBPF yields the best
performance in our settings and might prove to be useful
in applications in which particle filtering is preferred.

Table 2: Goal Prediction: Model-2
N
100
100
200
200
500
500

Inference
IJGP-RBPF(1,1)
IJGP-RBPF(1,2)
IJGP-RBPF(1,1)
IJGP-RBPF(1,2)
IJGP-RBPF(1,1)
IJGP-RBPF(1,2)
IJGP(1)-S
IJGP(2)-S
Average

Time
8.3
14.5
23.4
31.4
40.08
51.87
6.34
10.78

LEARNING
IJGP-RBPF
IJGP-S
(1,1)
(1,2)
(1)
(2)
73
73
71
73
76
76
71
75
76
77
71
75
76
77
71
76
76
77
71
76
76
77
71
76
71
73
71
74
76
76
72
76
75
75.75
71.125
75.125

Table 4: False positives (FP) and False negatives for routes
taken by a person (FN)
N

100
200
100
200

INFERENCE
IJGP(1)
IJGP(2)
IJGP-RBPF(1,1)
IJGP-RBPF(1,1)
IJGP-RBPF(1,2)
IJGP-RBPF(1,2)

Model1
FP/FN
33/23
31/17
33/21
33/21
32/22
31/22

Model2
FP/FN
39/34
39/33
39/33
39/33
42/33
38/33

Model3
FP/FN
60/55
60/54
58/43

8 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we introduced a new modeling framework
called HDMNs, a representation that handles discrete-timestochastic processes, deterministic and probabilistic information on both continuous and discrete variables in a systematic way. We also propose a GBP-based algorithm
called IJGP(i)-S for approximate inference in this framework. The main algorithmic contribution of this paper
is presenting a class of Rao-Blackwellised particle filtering algorithm, IJGP-RBPF for HDMNs which integrates
a generalized belief propagation component with a RaoBlackwellised Particle Filtering scheme for effective sampling in the presence of constraints. Another contribution
of this paper is addressing a complex and highly relevant
real life domain using a general framework and domain independent algorithms. Directions for future work include
relaxing the restrictions made on dependencies between
discrete and continuous variables and developing an efficient EM-algorithm.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The first and third author were supported in part by National Science Foundation under award numbers 0331707
and 0331690. The second-author was supported in part by
the NSF grant IIS-0412854.

References
[Bidyuk and Dechter, 2004] Bidyuk, B. and Dechter, R.
(2004). On finding minimal w-cutset problem. In UAI04.
[Bui, 2003] Bui, H. (2003). A general model for online
probabilistic plan recognition. In IJCAI-2003.
[Dechter, 2003] Dechter, R. (2003). Constraint Processing. Morgan Kaufmann.
[Dechter et al., 2002] Dechter, R., Kask, K., and Mateescu, R. (2002). Iterative join graph propagation. In
UAI ’02, pages 128–136. Morgan Kaufmann.
[Dechter and Larkin, 2001] Dechter, R. and Larkin, D.
(2001). Hybrid processing of beliefs and constraints. In
Proc. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 112–
119.

[Doucet et al., 2000] Doucet, A., de Freitas, N., Murphy,
K. P., and Russell, S. J. (2000). Rao-blackwellised particle filtering for dynamic bayesian networks. In UAI
’00: Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Uncertainty
in Artificial Intelligence, pages 176–183. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
[Gogate and Dechter, 2005] Gogate, V. and Dechter, R.
(2005). Approximate inference algorithms for hybrid
bayesian networks with discrete constraints. 21st Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI2005.
[Heskes and Zoeter, 2002] Heskes, T. and Zoeter, O.
(2002). Expectation propagation for approximate inference in dynamic bayesian networks. In Proceedings
of 18th Conference of Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI-2002.
[Larkin and Dechter, 2003] Larkin, D. and Dechter, R.
(2003). Bayesian inference in the presence of determinism. In AI-STATS-2003.
[Lauritzen, 1992] Lauritzen, S. (1992). Propagation of
probabilities, means, and variances in mixed graphical
association models. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 87(420):1098–1108.
[Lerner, 2002] Lerner, U. (2002). Hybrid Bayesian Networks for Reasoning about complex systems. PhD thesis, Stanford University.
[Levine and Casella, 2001] Levine, R. and Casella, G.
(2001). Implementations of the monte carlo em algorithm. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 10:422–439.
[Liao et al., 2004] Liao, L., Fox, D., and Kautz., H.
(2004). Learning and inferring transportation routines.
In AAAI-2004.
[Murphy, 2002] Murphy, K. (2002). Dynamic Bayesian
Networks: Representation, Inference and Learning.
PhD thesis, University of California Berkeley.
[Patterson et al., 2003] Patterson, D. J., Liao, L., Fox, D.,
and Kautz, H. (2003). Inferring high-level behavior
from low-level sensors. In Proceedings of UBICOMP
2003: The Fifth International Conference on Ubiquitous
Computing, pages 73–89.

[Dechter and Mateescu, 2003] Dechter, R. and Mateescu,
R. (2003). A simple insight into iterative belief propagation’s success. UAI-2003.

S. and Zi[Peeta and Zilaskopoulos, 2001] Peeta,
laskopoulos, A. K. (2001). Foundations of dynamic
traffic assignment: The past, the present and the future.
Networks and Spatial Economics, 1:233–265.

[Dechter and Mateescu, 2004] Dechter, R. and Mateescu,
R. (2004). Mixtures of deterministic-probabilistic networks and their and/or search space. In Proceedings of
the 20th Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
Intelligence (UAI-04).

[Sherali et al., 2003] Sherali, H. D., Narayanan, A., and
Sivanandan, R. (2003). Estimation of origin-destination
trip-tables based on a partial set of traffic link volumes. Transportation Research, Part B: Methodological, pages 815–836.

