a Bayesian-network structure. More recently, researchers (including Boutilier et al., 1995 and Friedman and Goldszmidt, 1996) have extended the “classical” definition of a Bayesian network to include efficient representations of local constraints that can hold
among the parameters stored in the nodes of the network. Two notable features about the this recent work
are (1) the majority of effort has concentrated on inferring decision trees, which are structures that can explicitly represent some parameter equality constraints
and (2) researchers typically apply non-Bayesian (or
asymptotically Bayesian) scoring functions such as
MDL as to evaluate the goodness-of-fit of networks
to the data.
In this paper, we apply a Bayesian approach to learning Bayesian networks that contain decision-graphs—
generalizations of decision trees that can encode arbitrary equality constraints—to represent the conditional probability distributions in the nodes.
In Section 2, we introduce notation and previous relevant work. In Section 3 we describe how to evaluate
the Bayesian score of a Bayesian network that contains
decision graphs. In Section 4, we investigate how a
search algorithm can be used, in conjunction with a
scoring function, to identify these networks from data.
In Section 5, we use data from various domains to
evaluate the learning accuracy of a greedy search algorithm applied the search spaces defined in Section 4.
Finally, in Section 6, we conclude with a discussion of
future extensions to this work.

2

BACKGROUND

In this section, we describe our notation and discuss
previous relevant work. Throughout the remainder of
this paper, we use lower-case letters to refer to variables, and upper-case letters to refer to sets of variables. We write xi = k when we observe that variable
xi is in state k. When we observe the state of every variable in a set X, we call the set of observations
a state of X. Although arguably an abuse of notation, we find it convenient to index the states of a
set of variables with a single integer. For example, if
X = {x1 , x2 } is a set containing two binary variables,
we may write X = 2 to denote {x1 = 1, x2 = 0}.
In Section 2.1, we define a Bayesian network. In Section 2.2 we describe decision trees and how they can be
used to represent the probabilities within a Bayesian
network. In Section 2.3, we describe decision graphs,
which are generalizations of decision trees.
2.1

BAYESIAN NETWORKS

Consider a domain U of n discrete variables x1 , . . . , xn ,
where each xi has a finite number of states. A Bayesian
network for U represents a joint probability distribution over U by encoding (1) assertions of conditional
independence and (2) a collection of probability distributions. Specifically, a Bayesian network B is the pair
(BS , Θ), where BS is the structure of the network, and
Θ is a set of parameters that encode local probability
distributions.
The structure BS has two components: the global
structure G and a set of local structures M . G is an
acyclic, directed graph—dag for short—that contains
a node for each variable xi ∈ U . The edges in G denote probabilistic dependences among the variables in
U . We use P ar(xi ) to denote the set of parent nodes
of xi in G. We use xi to refer to both the variable in
U and the corresponding node in G. The set of local
structures M = {M1 , . . . , Mn } is a set of n mappings,
one for each variable xi , such that Mi maps each value
of {xi , P ar(xi )} to a parameter in Θ.
The assertions of conditional independence implied by
the global structure G in a Bayesian network B impose
the following decomposition of the joint probability
distribution over U :
Y
p(xi |P ar(xi ), Θ, Mi , G)
(1)
p(U |B) =
i

The set of parameters Θ contains—for each node xi ,
for each state k of xi , and for each parent state j—
a single parameter1 Θ(i, j, k) that encodes the condiP
1
Because the sum

k

p(xi = k|P ar(xi ), Θ, Mi , G) must

x

y
z

Figure 1: Bayesian network for U = {x, y, z}
tional probabilities given in Equation 1. That is,
p(xi = k|P ar(xi ) = j, Θ, Mi , G) = Θ(i, j, k)

(2)

Note that the function Θ(i, j, k) depends on both Mi
and G. For notational simplicity we leave this dependency implicit.
Let ri denote the number of states of variable xi , and
let qi denote the number of states of the set P ar(xi ).
We use Θij to denote the set of parameters characterizing the distribution p(xi |P ar(xi ) = j, Θ, Mi , G):
i
Θij = ∪rk=1
Θ(i, j, k)

We use Θi to denote the set of parameters
characterizing all of the conditional distributions
p(xi |P ar(xi ), Θ, Mi , G):
i
Θij
Θi = ∪qj=1

In the “classical” implementation of a Bayesian network, each node xi stores (ri − 1) · qi distinct parameters in a large table. That is, Mi is simply a lookup
into a table. Note that the size of this table grows
exponentially with the number of parents qi .
2.2

DECISION TREES

There are often equality constraints that hold among
the parameters in Θi , and researchers have used mappings other than complete tables to more efficiently
represent these parameters. For example, consider the
global structure G depicted in Figure 1, and assume
that all nodes are binary. Furthermore, assume that if
x = 1, then the value of z does not depend on y. That
is,
p(z|x = 1, y = 0, Θ, Mz , G) = p(z|x = 1, y = 1, Θ, Mz , G)

Using the decision tree shown in Figure 2 to implement the mapping Mz , we can represent p(z|x =
1, y, Θ, MZ ) using a single distribution for both
p(z|x = 1, y = 0, Θ, Mz , G) and p(z|x = 1, y =
1, Θ, Mz , G).
be one, Θ will actually only contain ri − 1 distinct parameters for this distribution. For simplicity, we leave this
implicit for the remainder of the paper.

ditional distributions. Furthermore, many researchers
have developed methods for learning these local structures from data.

x
1

0

y
0
p(z|x=0, y=0)

1

p(z|x=1, y=0)
=
p(z|x=1, y=1)

p(z|x=0, y=1)

Figure 2: Decision tree for node z

Decision trees, described in detail by Breiman (1984),
can be used to represent sets of parameters in a
Bayesian network. Each tree is a dag containing exactly one root node, and every node other than the
root node has exactly one parent. Each leaf node contains a table of k − 1 distinct parameters that collectively define a conditional probability distribution
p(xi |P ar(xi ), Θ, Mi , D). Each non-leaf node in the
tree is annotated with the name of one of the parent
variables π ∈ P ar(xi ). Out-going edges from a node π
in the tree are annotated with mutually exclusive and
collectively exhaustive sets of values for the variable
π.
When a node v in a decision tree is annotated with
the name π, we say that v splits π. If the edge from v1
to child v2 is annotated with the value k, we say that
v2 is the child of v1 corresponding to k. Note that by
definition of the edge annotations, the child of a node
corresponding to any value is unique.
We traverse the decision tree to find the parameter
Θ(i, j, k) as follows. First, initialize v to be the root
node in the decision tree. Then, as long as v is not a
leaf, let π be the node in P ar(xi ) that v splits, and
reset v to be the child of v corresponding to the value
of π—determined by P ar(xi ) = j—and repeat. If v is
a leaf, we we return the parameter in the table corresponding to state k of xi .
Decision tree are more expressive mappings than complete tables, as we can represent all of the parameters
from a complete table using a complete decision tree. A
complete decision tree Ti for a node xi is a tree of depth
|P ar(xi )|, such that every node vl at level l in Ti splits
on the lth parent πl ∈ P ar(xi ) and has exactly rπl
children, one for each value of π. It follows by this definition that if Ti is a complete tree, then Θ(i, j, k) will
map to a distinct parameter for each distinct {i, j},
which is precisely the behavior of a complete table.
Researchers have found that decision trees are useful
for eliciting probability distributions, as experts often have extensive knowledge about equality of con-

2.3

DECISION GRAPHS

In this section we describe a generalization of the decision tree, known as a decision graph, that can represent a much richer set of equality constraints among
the local parameters. A decision graph is identical to a
decision tree except that, in a decision graph, the nonroot nodes can have more than one parent. Consider,
for example, the decision graph depicted in Figure 3.
This decision graph represents a conditional probability distribution p(z|x, y, Θ) for the node z in Figure
1 that has different equality constraints than the tree
shown in Figure 2. Specifically, the decision graph encodes the equality
p(z|x = 0, y = 1, Θ) = p(z|x = 1, y = 0, Θ)

x
1

0

y
0

p(z|x=0, y=0)

y
1

0

p(z|x=0, y=1)
=
p(z|x=1, y=0)

1
p(z|x=1, y=1)

Figure 3: Decision graph for node z
We use Di to denote a decision graph for node xi .
If the mapping in a node xi is implemented with Di ,
we use Di instead of Mi to denote the mapping. A
decision-graph Di can explicitly represent an arbitrary
set of equality constraints of the form
Θij = Θij 0

(3)

for j 6= j 0 . To demonstrate this, consider a complete
tree Ti for node xi . We can transform Ti into a decision
graph that represents all of the desired constraints by
simply merging together any leaf nodes that contain
sets that are equal.
It is interesting to note that any equality constraint of
the form given in Equation 3 can also be interpreted
as the following independence constraint:
xi ⊥⊥ P ar(xi ) | P ar(xi ) = j or P ar(xi ) = j 0
If we allow nodes in a decision graph Di to split on
node xi as well as the nodes in P ar(xi ), we can represent an arbitrary set of equality constraints among

the parameters Θi . We return to this issue in Section
6, and assume for now that nodes in Di do not split
on xi .

3

LEARNING DECISION GRAPHS

As we showed in Section 2, if the local structure for a
node xi is a decision graph Di , then sets of parameters Θij and Θij 0 can be identical for j 6= j 0 . For the
derivations to follow, we find it useful to enumerate the
distinct parameter sets in Θi . Equivalently, we find it
useful to enumerate the leaves in a decision graph.

Many researchers have derived the Bayesian measureof-fit—herein called the Bayesian score—for a network,
assuming that there are no equalities among the parameters. Friedman and Goldszmidt (1996) derive
the Bayesian score for a structure containing decision trees. In this section, we show how to evaluate
the Bayesian score for a structure containing decision
graphs.

For the remainder of this section, we adopt the following syntactic convention. When referring to a parameter set stored in the leaf of a decision graph, we
use a to denote the node index, and b to denote the
parent-state index. When referring to a parameter set
in the context of a specific parent state of a node, we
use i to denote the node index and j to denote the
parent-state index.

To derive the Bayesian score, we first need to make
an assumption about the process that generated the
database D. In particular, we assume that the
database D is a random (exchangeable) sample from
some unknown distribution ΘU , and that all of the
constraints in ΘU can be represented using a network
structure BS containing decision graphs.

To enumerate the set of leaves in a decision graph D a ,
we define a set of leaf-set indices La . The idea is that
La contains exactly one parent-state index for each leaf
in the graph. More precisely, let l denote the number
of leaves in Da . Then La = {b1 , . . . , bl } is defined as a
set with the following properties:

As we saw in the previous section, the structure
BS = {G, M } imposes a set of independence constraints that must hold in any distribution represented
using a Bayesian network with that structure. We define BSh to be the hypothesis that (1) the independence
constraints imposed by structure BS hold in the joint
distribution ΘU from which the database D was generated, and (2) ΘU contains no other independence
constraints. We refer the reader to Heckerman et al.
(1994) for a more detailed discussion of structure hypotheses.
The Bayesian score for a structure BS is the posterior
probability of BSh , given the observed database D:
p(BSh |D) = c · p(D|BSh )p(BSh )
1
. If we are only concerned with the relwhere c = p(D)
ative scores of various structures, as is almost always
the case, then the constant c can be ignored. Consequently, we extend our definition of the Bayesian score
to be any function proportional to p(D|BSh )p(BSh ).

For now, we assume that there is an efficient method
for assessing p(BSh ) (assuming this distribution is uniform, for example), and concentrate on how to derive
the marginal likelihood term p(D|BSh ). By integrating
over all of the unknown parameters Θ we have:
Z
h
p(Θ|BSh )p(D|Θ, BSh )
(4)
p(D|BS ) =
Θ

Researchers typically make a number of simplifying
assumptions that collectively allow Equation 4 to be
expressed in closed form. Before introducing these assumptions, we need the following notation.

1. For all {b, b0 } ⊆ La , b 6= b0 ⇒ Θa,b 6= Θa,b0
2. ∪b∈La Θa,b = Θa
The first property ensures that each index in L corresponds to a different leaf, and the second property
ensures that every leaf is included.
One assumption used to derive Equation 4 in closed
form is the parameter independence assumption. Simply stated, this assumption says that given the hypothesis BSh , knowledge about any distinct parameter set
Θab does not give us any information about any other
distinct parameter set.
Assumption 1 (Parameter Independence)
p(Θ|BSh ) =

n Y
Y

p(Θab |BSh )

a=1 b∈La

Another assumption that researchers make is the
Dirichlet assumption. This assumption restricts the
prior distributions over the distinct parameter sets to
be Dirichlet.
Assumption 2 (Dirichlet)
For all a and for all b ∈ La ,
p(Θab |BSh ) ∝

ra
Y

abc −1
Θα
abc

c=1

where αabc > 0 for 1 ≤ c ≤ ra
Recall that ra denotes the number of states for node
xa . The hyperparameters αabc characterize our prior

knowledge about the parameters in Θ. Heckerman et
al. (1995) describe how to derive these exponents from
a prior Bayesian network. We return to this issue later.
Using these assumptions, we can derive the Bayesian
score for a structure that contains decision graphs by
following a completely analogous method as Heckerman et al. (1995). Before showing the result, we must
define the inverse function of Θ(i, j, k). Let θ denote
an arbitrary parameter in Θ. The function Θ−1 (θ) denotes the set of index triples that Θ() maps into θ.
That is,
Θ−1 (θ) = {i, j, k|Θ(i, j, k) = θ}
Let Dijk denote the number of cases in D for which
xi = k and P ar(xi ) = j. We define Nabc as follows:
X
Dijk
Nabc =
ijk∈Θ−1 (θabc )

Intuitively, Nabc is the number of cases in D that provide information
about thePparameter θabc . Letting
P
Nab = c Nabc and αab = c αabc , we can write the
Bayesian score as follows:
p(D, BSh )

= p(BSh )

n Y
Y

a=1 b∈La

Γ(αab )
Γ(Nab + αab )

Y Γ(Nabc + αabc )
Γ(αabc )
c=1
|ra |

·

(5)

We can determine all of the counts Nabc for each node
xa as follows. First, initialize all the counts Nabc to
zero. Then, for each case C in the database, let kC
and jC denote the value for xi and P ar(xi ) in the
case, respectively, and increment by one the count
Nabc corresponding to the parameter θabc = p(xi =
kC |P ar(xi ) = jC , Θ, Da ). Each such parameter can
be found efficiently by traversing Da from the root.
We say a scoring function is node decomposable if it
can be factored into a product of functions that depend only a node and its parents. Node decomposability is useful for efficiently searching through the
space of global-network structures. Note that Equation 5 is node decomposable as long as p(BSh ) is node
decomposable.
We now consider some node-decomposable distributions for p(BSh ). Perhaps the simplest distribution is
to assume a uniform prior over network structures.
That is, we set p(BSh ) to a constant in Equation 5.
We use this simple prior for the experiments described
in Section 5. Another approach is to (a-priori) favor
networks with fewer parameters. For example, we can
use
n
Y
p(BSh ) ∝ κ|Θ| =
κ|Θa |
(6)
a=1

where 0 < κ <= 1. Note that κ = 1 corresponds to
the uniform prior over all structure hypotheses.
A simple prior for the parameters in Θ is to assume
αabc = 1 for all a, b, c. This choice of values corresponds to a uniform prior over the parameters, and
was explored by Cooper and Herskovits (1992) in the
context of Bayesian networks containing complete tables. We call the Bayesian scoring function the uniform scoring function if all the hyperparameters are
set to one. We have found that this prior works well
in practice and is easy to implement.
Using two additional assumptions, Heckerman et al.
(1995) show that each αabc can be derived from a prior
Bayesian network. The idea is that αabc is proportional to the prior probability, obtained from the prior
network, of all states of {xi = k, P ar(xi ) = j} that
map to the parameter θabc . Specifically, if B P is our
prior Bayesian network, we set
X
αabc = α
p(xi = k, P ar(xi ) = j|B P )
ijk∈Θ−1 (θabc )

where α is a single equivalent sample size used to asses
all of the exponents, and P ar(xi ) denotes the parents
of xi in G (as opposed to the parents in the prior network). α can be understood as a measure of confidence that we have for the parameters in B P . We call
the Bayesian scoring function the PN scoring function
(P rior N etwork scoring function) if the exponents are
assessed this way. Heckerman et al. (1995) derive
these constraints in the context of Bayesian networks
with complete tables. In the full version of this paper,
we show that these constraints follow when using decision graphs as well, with only slight modifications to
the additional assumptions.
Although we do not provide the details here, we can
use the decision-graph structure to efficiently compute
the exponents αabc from the prior network in much
the same way we computed the Nabc values from the
database.

4

SEARCH

Given a scoring function that evaluates the merit of
a Bayesian-network structure BS , learning Bayesian
networks from data reduces to a search for one or more
structures that have a high score. Chickering (1995)
shows that finding the optimal structure containing
complete tables for the mappings M is NP-hard when
using a Bayesian scoring function. Given this result,
it seems reasonable to assume that by allowing (the
more general) decision-graph mappings, the problem
remains hard, and consequently it is appropriate to
apply heuristic search techniques.

In Section 4.1, we define a search space over decisiongraph structures within a single node xi , assuming
that the parent set P ar(xi ) is fixed. Once such a space
is defined, we can apply to that space any number of
well-known search algorithms. For the experiments
described in Section 5, for example, we apply greedy
search.

0
v1

0

There are three operators we define, and each operator is a modification to the current set of leaves in a
decision graph.
Definition (Complete Split)
Let v be a leaf node in the decision graph, and let π ∈
P ar(xi ) be a parent of xi . A complete split C(v, π)
adds ri new leaf nodes as children to v, where each
child of v corresponds to a distinct value of π.
Definition (Binary Split)
Let v be a leaf node in the decision graph, and let π ∈
P ar(xi ) be a parent of xi . A binary split B(v, π, k)
adds 2 new leaf nodes as children to v, where the first
child corresponds to state k of π, and the other child
corresponds to all other states of π.
Definition (Merge)
Let v1 and v2 be two distinct leaf nodes in the decision
graph. A Merge M (v1 , v2 ) merges the v1 and v2 into
a single node. That is, the resulting node inherits all
parents from both v1 and v2 .
In Figure 4, we show the result of each type of operator
to a decision graph for a node z with parents x and y,
where x and y both have three states.
We add the pre-condition that the operator must
change the parameter constraints implied by the decision graph. We would not allow, for example, a
complete split C(v1 , y) in Figure 4a: two of v1 ’s new
children would correspond to impossible states of y
({y = 0 and y = 1} and {y = 0 and y = 2}), and
the third child would correspond to the original constraints at v1 ({y = 0 and y = 0}).
Note that starting from a decision graph containing a

y
1
0

DECISION-GRAPH SEARCH

In this section, we assume that the states of our search
space correspond to all of the possible decision graphs
for some node xi . In order for a search algorithm to
traverse this space, we must define a set of operators
that transform one state into another.

2

v2

v3

(a)

In Section 4.2 we describe a greedy algorithm that
combines local-structure search over all the decision
graphs in the nodes with a global-structure search over
the edges in G.
4.1

y
1

(b)

0

2
x
1

y
1

y

2
0

x
2

0

(c)

1,2

1,2

(d)

Figure 4: Example of the application of each type of
operator: (a) the original decision graph, (b) the result of applying C(v3 , x), (c) the result of applying
B(v3 , x, 0), and (d) the result of applying M (v2 , v3 )
single node (both the root and a leaf node), we can
generate a complete decision tree by repeatedly applying complete splits. As discussed in the previous
section, we can represent any parameter-set equalities
by merging the leaves of a complete decision tree. Consequently, starting from a graph containing one node
there exists a series of operators that result in any set
of possible parameter-set equalities. Note also that if
we repeatedly merge the leaves of a decision graph until there is a single parameter set, the resulting graph
is equivalent (in terms of parameter equalities) to the
graph containing a single node. Therefore, our operators are sufficient for moving from any set of parameter constraints to any other set of parameter constraints. Although we do not discuss them here, there
are methods that can simplify (in terms of the number
of nodes) some decision graphs such that they represent the same set of parameter constraints.
The complete-split operator is actually not needed to
ensure that all parameter equalities can be reached:
any complete split can be replaced by a series of binary
splits such that the resulting parameter-set constraints
are identical. We included the complete-split operator
in the hopes that it would help lead the search algorithm to better structures. In Section 5, we compare
greedy search performance in various search spaces defined by including only subsets of the above operators.
4.2

COMBINING GLOBAL AND LOCAL
SEARCH

In this section we describe a greedy algorithm that
combines global-structure search over the edges in G

with local-structure search over the decision graphs in
all of the nodes of G.
Suppose that in the decision-graph Di for node xi ,
there is no non-leaf node annotated with some parent
π ∈ P ar(xi ). In this case, xi is independent of π
given its other parents, and we can remove π from
P ar(xi ) without violating the decomposition given in
Equation 1. Thus given a fixed structure, we can learn
all the local decision graphs for all of the nodes, and
then delete those parents that are independent. We
can also consider adding edges as follows. For each
node xi , add to P ar(xi ) all non-descendants of xi in
G, learn a decision graph for xi , and then delete all
parents that are not contained in the decision graph.
Figure 5 shows a greedy algorithm that uses combines
these two ideas. In our experiments, we started the
algorithm with a structure for which G contains no
edges, and each graph Di consists of a single root node.
1.

Score the current network structure BS

2.

For each node xi in G

3.
4.
5.

Add every non-descendant that is not a parent
of xi to P ar(xi )
For every possible operator O to the decision
graph Di
Apply O to BS

6.

Score the resulting structure

7.

Unapply O

8.
9.
10.
11.

12.
13.
14.

Remove any parent that was added to xi in
step 3
If the best score from step 6 is better than the
current score
Let O be the operator that resulted in the best
score
If O is a split operator (either complete or binary) on a node xj that is not in P ar(xi ), then
add xj to P ar(xi )
Apply O to BS
Goto 1
Otherwise, return BS

Figure 5: Greedy algorithm that combines local and
global structure search
Note that as a result of a merge operator in a decision
graph D i , xi may be rendered independent from one
of its parents π ∈ P ar(xi ), even if D i contains a node
annotated with π. For a simple example, we could
repeatedly merge all leaves into a single leaf node,
and the resulting graph implies that xi does not depend on any of its parents. We found experimentally
that—when using the algorithm from Figure 5—this
phenomenon is rare. Because testing for these parent
deletions is expensive, we chose to not check for them

in the experiments described in Section 5.
Another greedy approach for learning structures containing decision trees has been explored by Friedman
and Goldszmidt (1996). The idea is to score edge operations in G (adding, deleting, or reversing edges) by
applying the operation and then greedily learning the
local decision trees for any nodes who’s parents have
changed as a result of the operation. In the full version
of the paper, we compare our approach to theirs.

5

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

In this section we investigate how varying the set of
allowed operators affects the performance of greedy
search. By disallowing the merge operator, the search
algorithms will identify decision-tree local structures in
the Bayesian network. Consequently, we can see how
learning accuracy changes, in the context of greedy
search, when we generalize the local structures from
decision trees to decision graphs.
In all of the experiments described in this section, we
measure learning accuracy by the posterior probability
of the identified structure hypotheses. Researchers often use other criteria, such as predictive accuracy on a
holdout set or structural difference from some generative model. The reason that we do not use any of these
criteria is that we are evaluating how well the search
algorithm performs in various search spaces, and the
goal of the search algorithm is to maximize the scoring
function. We are not evaluating how well the Bayesian
scoring functions approximate some other criteria.
In our first experiment, we consider the Promoter
Gene Sequences database from the UC Irvine collection, consisting of 106 cases. There are 58 variables
in this domain. 57 of these variables, {x1 , . . . , x57 }
represent the “base-pair” values in a DNA sequence,
and each has four possible values. The other variable,
promoter, is binary and indicates whether or not the
sequence has promoter activity. The goal of learning in
this domain is to build an accurate model of the distribution p(promoter|x1 , . . . , x57 ), and consequently it is
reasonable to consider a static graphical structure for
which P ar(promoter) = {x1 , . . . , x57 }, and search for
a decision graph in node promoter.
Table 1 shows the relative Bayesian scores for the best
decision graph learned, using a greedy search with various parameter priors and search spaces. All searches
started with a decision graph containing a single node,
and the current best operator was applied at each step
until no operator increased the score of the current
state. Each column corresponds to a different restriction of the search space described in Section 4.1: the
labels indicate what operators the greedy search was

Table 1: Greedy search performance for various
Bayesian scoring functions, using different sets of operators, in the P romoter domain.

uniform
U-PN 10
U-PN 20
U-PN 30
U-PN 40
U-PN 40

C
0
0
0
0
0
0

B
13.62
6.12
5.09
4.62
3.14
2.99

CB
6.07
4.21
3.34
2.97
1.27
1.12

CM
22.13
9.5
14.11
10.93
16.3
15.76

BM
26.11
10.82
12.11
12.98
13.54
15.54

CBM
26.11
12.93
14.12
16.65
16.02
17.54

allowed to use, where C denotes complete splits, B
denotes binary splits, and M denotes merges. The column labeled BM, for example, shows the results when
a greedy search used binary splits and merges, but
not complete splits. Each row corresponds to a different parameter-prior for the Bayesian scoring function.
The U-PN scoring function is a special case of the PN
scoring function for which the prior network imposes
a uniform distribution over all variables. The number following the U-PN in the row labels indicates the
equivalent-sample size α. All results use a uniform
prior over structure hypotheses. A value of zero in a
row of the table denotes the hypothesis with lowest
probability out of all those identified using the given
parameter prior. All other values denote the natural
logarithm of how many times more likely the identified
hypothesis is than the one with lowest probability.
By comparing the relative values between searches
that use merges and searches that don’t use merges,
we see that without exception, adding the merge operator results in a significantly more probable structure
hypothesis. We can therefore conclude that a greedy
search over decision graphs results in better solutions
than a greedy search over decision trees. An interesting observation is that complete-split operator actually
reduces solution quality when we restrict the search to
decision trees.
We performed an identical experiment to another classification problem, but for simplicity we only present
the results for the uniform scoring function. Recall
from Section 3 that the uniform scoring function has
all of the hyperparameters αabc set to one. This second
experiment was run with the Splice-junction Gene Sequences database, again from the UC Irvine repository.
This database also contains a DNA sequence, and the
problem is to predict whether the position in the middle of the sequence is an “intron-exon” boundary, an
“exon-intron” boundary, or neither. The results are
given in Table 2. We used the same uniform prior for
structure hypotheses.

Table 2: Greedy search performance for the uniform
scoring function, using different sets of operators, in
the Splice domain.
C
0

B
383

CB
363

CM
464

BM
655

CBM
687

Table 3: Greedy search performance for the uniform
scoring function for each node in the ALARM network.
Also included is the uniform score for the completetable model
COMP
C
B
CB CM BM CBM
0
134 186 165 257 270
270

Table 2 again supports the claim that we get a significant improvement by using decision graphs instead of
decision trees.
Our final set of experiments were done in the ALARM
domain, a well-known benchmark for Bayesiannetwork learning algorithms. The ALARM network,
described by Beinlich et al. (1989), is a handconstructed Bayesian network used for diagnosis in a
medical domain. The parameters of this network are
stored using complete tables.
In the first experiment for the ALARM domain, we
demonstrate that for a fixed global structure G, the
hypothesis identified by searching for local decision
graphs in all the nodes can be significantly better than
the hypothesis corresponding to complete tables in the
nodes. We first generated 1000 cases from the ALARM
network, and then computed the uniform Bayesian
score for the ALARM network, assuming that the parameter mappings M are complete tables. We expect
the posterior of this model to be quite good, because
we’re evaluating the generative model structure. Next,
using the uniform scoring function, we applied the six
greedy searches as in the previous experiments to identify good decision graphs for all of the nodes in the
network. We kept the global structure G fixed to be
identical to the global structure of the ALARM network. The results are shown in Table 3, and the values
have the same semantics as in the previous two tables.
The score given in the first column labeled COMP is
the score for the complete-table model.
Table 3 demonstrates that search performance using
decision graphs can identify significantly better models than when just using decision trees. The fact that
the complete-table model attains such a low score (the
best hypothesis we found is e270 times more probable
than the complete-table hypothesis!) is not surprising upon examination of the probability tables stored

Table 4: Performance of greedy algorithm that combines local and global structure search, using different
sets of operators, in the ALARM domain. Also included is the result of a greedy algorithm that searches
for global structure assuming complete tables.
COMP
255

C
0

B
256

CB
241

CM
869

BM
977

CBM
1136

in the ALARM network: most of the tables contain
parameter-set equalities.
In the next experiment, we used the ALARM domain
to test the structure-learning algorithm given in Section 4.2. We again generated a database of 1000 cases,
and used the uniform scoring function with a uniform
prior over structure hypotheses. We ran six versions
of our algorithm, corresponding to the six possible sets
of local-structure operators as in the previous experiments. We also ran a greedy structure-search algorithm that assumes complete tables in the nodes. We
initialized this search with a global network structure
with no edges, and the operators were single-edge modifications to the graph: deletion, addition and reversal.
In Table 4 we show the results. The column labeled
COMP corresponds to the greedy search over structures with complete tables.
Once again, we note that when we allow nodes to
contain decision graphs, we get a significant improvement in solution quality. Note that the search
over complete-table structures out-performed our algorithm when we restricted the algorithm to search
for decision trees containing either (1) only complete
splits or (2) complete splits and binary splits.
In our final experiment, we repeated the previous experiment, except that we only allowed our algorithm
to add parents that are not descendants in the generative model. That is, we restricted the global search
over G to those dags that did not violate the partial ordering in the ALARM network. We also ran the same
greedy structure-search algorithm that searches over
structures with complete tables, except we initialized
the search with the ALARM network. The results of
this experiment are shown in Table 5. From the table,
we see that the constrained searches exhibit the same
relative behavior as the unconstrained searches.
For each experiment in the ALARM domain (Tables
3, 4, and 5) the values presented measure the performance of search relative to the worst performance in
that experiment. In Table 6, we compare search performance across all experiments in the ALARM domain. That is, a value of zero in the table corresponds
to the experiment and set of operators that led to the

Table 5: Performance of a restricted version of our
greedy algorithm, using different sets of operators, in
the ALARM domain. Also included is the result of
a greedy algorithm, initialized with the global structure of the ALARM network, that searches for global
structure assuming complete tables.
COMP
0

C
179

B
334

CB
307

CM
553

BM
728

CBM
790

Table 6: Comparison of Bayesian scores for all experiments in the ALARM domain

S
U
C

COMP
278
255
336

C
412
0
515

B
464
256
670

CB
443
241
643

CM
534
869
889

BM
548
976
1064

CBM
548
1136
1126

learned hypothesis with lowest posterior probability,
out of all experiments and operator restrictions we
considered in the ALARM domain. All other values
given in the table are relative to this (lowest) posterior
probability. The row labels correspond to the experiment: S denotes the first experiment that performed
local searches in a static global structure, U denotes
the second experiment that performed unconstrained
structural searches, and C denotes the final experiment
that performed constrained structural search.
Rather surprising, each hypothesis learned using
global-structure search with decision graphs had a
higher posterior than every hypothesis learned using
the generative static structures.

6

DISCUSSION

In this paper we showed how to derive the Bayesian
score of a network structure that contains parameter
maps implemented as decision graphs. We defined a
search space for learning individual decision graphs
within a static global structure, and defined a greedy
algorithm that searches for both global and local structure simultaneously. We demonstrated experimentally
that greedy search over structures containing decision
graphs significantly outperforms greedy search over
both (1) structures containing complete tables and (2)
structures containing decision trees.
We now consider an extension to the decision graph
that we mentioned in Section 2.3. Recall that in a decision graph, the parameter sets are stored in a table
within the leaves. When decision graphs are implemented this way, any parameter θabc must belong to
exactly one (distinct) parameter set. An important

consequence of this property is that if the priors for
the parameter sets are Dirichlet (Assumption 2), then
the posterior distributions are Dirichlet as well. That
is, the Dirichlet distribution is conjugate with respect
to the likelihood of the observed data. As a result, it is
easy to derive the Bayesian scoring function in closed
form.
If we allow nodes within a decision graph Di to split
on node xi , we can represent an arbitrary set of parameter constraints of the form Θ(i, j, k) = Θ(i, j 0 , k 0 )
for j 6= j 0 and k 6= k 0 . For example, consider a Baysian
network for the two-variable domain {x, y}, where x is
a parent of y. We can use a decision graph for y that
splits on y to represent the constraint
p(y = 1|x = 0, Θ, Dy , G) = p(y = 0|x = 1, Θ, Dy , G)
Unfortunately, when we allow these types of constraints, the Dirichlet distribution is no longer conjugate with respect to the likelihood of the data, and the
parameter independence assumption is violated. Consequently, the derivation described in Section 3 will
not apply. Conjugate priors for a decision graph Di
that splits on node xi do exist, however, and in the
full version of this paper we use a weaker version of
parameter independence to derive the Bayesian score
for these graphs in closed form.
We conclude by noting that it is easy to extend the definition of a network structure to represent constraints
between the parameters of different nodes in the network, e.g. Θij = Θi0 j 0 for i 6= i0 . Both Buntine
(1994) and Thiesson (1995) consider these types of
constraints. The Bayesian score for such structures
can be derived by simple modifications to the approach
described in this paper.

References
[Beinlich et al., 1989] Beinlich, I., Suermondt, H.,
Chavez, R., and Cooper, G. (1989). The ALARM
monitoring system: A case study with two probabilistic inference techniques for belief networks. In
Proceedings of the Second European Conference on
Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, London, pages
247–256. Springer Verlag, Berlin.
[Boutlier et al., 1996] Boutlier, C., Friedman, N.,
Goldszmidt, M., and Koller, D. (1996). Contextspecific independence in Bayesian networks. In Proceedings of Twelfth Conference on Uncertainty in
Artificial Intelligence, Portland, OR, pages 115–123.
Morgan Kaufmann.
[Brieman et al., 1984] Brieman, L., Friedman, J., Olshen, R., and Stone, C. (1984). Classification and
Regression Trees. Wadsworth.

[Buntine, 1991] Buntine, W. (1991). Theory refinement on Bayesian networks. In Proceedings of Seventh Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, Los Angeles, CA, pages 52–60. Morgan Kaufmann.
[Buntine, 1994] Buntine, W. L. (1994). Learning
with graphical model. Technical Report FIA-94-02,
NASA Ame.
[Chickering, 1995] Chickering, D. M. (1995). Learning
Bayesian networks is NP-Complete. Submitted to:
Lecture Notes in Statistics.
[Cooper and Herskovits, 1992] Cooper, G. and Herskovits, E. (1992). A Bayesian method for the induction of probabilistic networks from data. Machine
Learning, 9:309–347.
[Friedman, 1996] Friedman, J. (1996). On bias, variance, 0/1-loss, and the curse of dimensionality. Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 1.
[Heckerman et al., 1994] Heckerman, D., Geiger, D.,
and Chickering, D. (1994). Learning Bayesian networks: The combination of knowledge and statistical data. In Proceedings of Tenth Conference on
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, Seattle, WA,
pages 293–301. Morgan Kaufman.
[Heckerman et al., 1995] Heckerman, D., Geiger, D.,
and Chickering, D. (1995). Learning Bayesian networks: The combination of knowledge and statistical data. Machine Learning, 20:197–243.
[Spiegelhalter et al., 1993] Spiegelhalter, D., Dawid,
A., Lauritzen, S., and Cowell, R. (1993). Bayesian
analysis in expert systems. Statistical Science,
8:219–282.
[Thiesson, 1995] Thiesson, B. (1995). Score and information for recursive exponential models with incomplete data. Technical report, Institute of Electronic
Systems, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark.

