application of HMC in statistics and machine learning.
There are few existing works dealing with the
automated tuning of HMC. Two notable approaches
are: the No U-turn sampler (NUTS) (Hoffman &
Gelman, 2011), which is an adaptive algorithm for
HMC that aims to find the best parameter settings by
tracking the sample path and preventing HMC from
retracing its steps in this path; and Riemann manifold
HMC (RMHMC) (Girolami & Calderhead, 2011),
which provides adaptations using the Riemannian
geometry of the problem.
In this paper, we follow the approach of adapting
Markov chains in order to improve the convergence
of both HMC and RMHMC. Our adaptive strategy
is based on Bayesian optimization; see for example
Brochu et al. (2009) and Snoek et al. (2012) for a
clear and comprehensive introduction to Bayesian
optimization. Bayesian optimization has been proposed previously for the adaptation of general MCMC
samplers by Mahendran et al. (2012) and Hamze
et al. (2013). To guarantee convergence, these works
were limited to a finite adaptation of the Markov
chain. However, in the field of adaptive MCMC, it
is well known that finite adaptation can result in
the sampler being trapped in suboptimal parameter
settings, leading to inefficient sampling.
We describe Hamiltonian-based Monte Carlo samplers in section 2, and then make the following
contributions:
• We present an algorithm for adaptive HMC in
which we allow for infinite adaptation of the
Markov chain, thus avoiding parameter traps due
to finite adaptation (section 3).
• Importantly, we prove that the adaptive MCMC

Adaptive Hamiltonian and Riemann Manifold Monte Carlo Samplers

samplers we present are ergodic in this infinite
adaptation setting (section 4).
• We provide a comprehensive set of experiments
demonstrating that the adaptive schemes perform
better in a diverse set of statistical problems (section 5).
• For most examples, we use a version of the
expected squared jumping distance proposed by
Pasarica & Gelman (2010) as the objective function for adaptation. However, in section 5, we also
introduce a new approach for adaptive MCMC
based on predictive measures, for use in settings
where it is possible to perform cross-validation or
bootstrapping.

Algorithm 1 Hamiltonian Monte Carlo Algorithm
1: Given: M , L, , and x1 .
2: for t = 1, 2, · · · do
3:
Sample pt ∼ N (0, M ) and Lr ∼ U (1, L)
4:
Let x0 = xt and p0 = pt + 2 ∂U
∂x x0
5:
for l = 1, 2, · · · , Lr do
−1
6:
xl = xl−1 + M pl−1
7:
pl = pl−1 +  ∂U
∂x xl
8:
end for
9:
pl = pl−1 − 2 ∂U
∂x xl
10:
Draw u ∼ U (0, 1)
t
t
11:
if u < min[1, eU (x )+K(p )−U (xl )−K(pl ) ] then
t+1
t+1
12:
Let (x , p ) = (xl , pl )
13:
else
14:
Let (xt+1 , pt+1 ) = (xt , pt )
15:
end if
16: end for

2. Hamiltonian-based Monte Carlo
Sampling
Hamiltonian (or Hybrid) Monte Carlo (Duane et al.,
1987; Neal, 2010), has become established as a powerful, general purpose Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) algorithm for sampling from general, continuous distributions. Its efficiency is due to the fact that
it makes use of gradient information from the target
density to allow for an ergodic Markov chain capable
of large transitions that are accepted with high probability. This efficiency and flexibility is demonstrated
by the wide range of applications to which HMC has
been applied, including: Bayesian generalized linear
models (Ishwaran, 1999), Bayesian neural networks
(Neal & Zhang, 2006), Gaussian process regression and
classification (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006), exponential family PCA and factor analysis (Mohamed et al.,
2008), and restricted Boltzmann machines (Ranzato &
Hinton, 2010), amongst others.
For HMC, we are required to specify a potential energy
function, which is the log of the joint distribution we
wish to sample from, U (x) = − log p(x) and a kinetic
energy function, most typically, K(p) = pT M−1 p/2,
with momentum vector p and a positive definite mass
matrix M. For standard HMC, the mass matrix is
set to the identity. We defer the technical details of
HMC to existing work (Neal, 2010), and present only
the algorithm here (Alg. 1).
HMC requires the selection of two free parameters: a
step-size  and a number leapfrog steps L. The accepted guidance is to choose a step-size to ensure that
the sampler’s rejection rate is between 25%-35%. It is
also preferable to have a large L, since this reduces the
random walk behavior of the sampler (Neal, 2010), but
too large an L results in unnecessary computation. In
this paper, we consider a slight variation of the HMC

algorithm: instead of performing L leapfrog steps at
each iteration, we only perform a random number of
leapfrog steps, chosen from the discrete uniform distribution over {1, · · · , L}, i.e. Lr ∼ U(1, L) steps. This
approach amounts to using a mixture of L different
HMC transition kernels, thus preserving detailed balance (Andrieu et al., 2003).
HMC is known to be highly sensitive to the choice of 
and L. We demonstrate HMC’s sensitivity to these parameters by sampling from a bivariate Gaussian with
correlation coefficient 0.99. We consider three settings
(, L) = {(0.16, 40), (0.16, 50), (0.15, 50)} and show the
behavior of the sampler as well as the autocorrelation
plot in figure 1. While the first setting exhibits good
behavior and low auto-correlation, small changes to
these settings results in poor mixing and high autocorrelation, as seen in the other graphs. Theoretical results concerning the optimal acceptance rate for
HMC exist, having been described by Beskos et al.
(2010) and Neal (2010), with both concluding a rate
around 0.65 as optimal. Such results, however, would
not help in choosing the best sampler out of the three
in Figure 1, since all three samplers in this demonstration have an acceptance rate around 0.7, leaving little
guidance for finding the most efficient sampler.
To address the problem of choosing these parameters, we will introduce a method for automatically and
adaptively tuning the parameters of HMC, reducing
the need for time-consuming, expert tuning. An existing approach for automatic tuning of HMC was introduced by Hoffman & Gelman (2011), referred to as
the No U-turn sampler (NUTS). NUTS allows for automatic tuning of both HMC’s parameters by tuning
the stepsize  during the burn-in phase, after which
it is fixed and the number of leapfrog steps is ad-

Adaptive Hamiltonian and Riemann Manifold Monte Carlo Samplers

Auto−correlation

Gaussian, ρ=0.99

ε = 0.16, L = 40

ε = 0.16, L = 50

8

ε = 0.15, L = 50

10

6

5
0

2
2

4

6

−5
−5

0

0
0

5

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0
0

ESJD(γ) = Eγ kxt+1 − xt k2 ,

5

4

0
0

the expected squared jumping distance (ESJD):

10

0
50

Lag

100

0

2

4

6

0
50

Lag

100

0

50

where γ = (L, ) denotes the set of parameters for
HMC. Maximizing the above objective is equivalent to
minimizing the first-order auto-correlation ρ1 . In practice, the above intractable expectation with respect to
the Markov chain is approximated by an empirical estimator, as outlined in Pasarica & Gelman (2010).

100

Lag

Figure 1. 1000 samples from a bivariate Gaussian distribution generated using HMC. We show the trajectory and
auto-correlation of the samples for 3 parameter settings.

justed thereafter for every iteration.  is chosen using
a stochastic approximation method referred to as dual
averaging, and L is chosen for every sample using a
recursive algorithm in which the number of leapfrog
steps is allowed to increase until the proposal trajectory taken by the sampler begins to move back towards
the initial point, thus preventing U-turns and allowing
for the good mixing of the chain.
Riemann manifold HMC (RMHMC) (Girolami &
Calderhead, 2011) is a sampling method derived from
HMC, and provides an adaptation mechanism for
HMC by exploiting the Riemannian geometry of the
parameter space. Rather than adapting  and L,
RMHMC accounts for the local structure of the joint
density by adapting the mass matrix M used in HMC.
Since RMHMC automatically adapts its mass matrix, the stepsize  is usually fixed and the number
of leapfrog steps L, which is a single scalar, can be
chosen using the rejection rate. While the sensitivity
to these parameters is greatly reduced, they must still
be set and there is no general guidance on how these
parameters should be chosen, making it desirable to
have a fully automatic method for RMHMC as well.

3. Adaptive Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
In order to adapt the MCMC parameters L and  for
HMC, we need to (i) define an objective function and
(ii) choose a suitable optimization method.
As pointed out in Pasarica & Gelman (2010), a natural objective function for adaptation is thePasymptotic
∞
efficiency of an MCMC sampler, (1 + 2 k=1 ρk )−1 ,
where ρk is the auto-correlation of the sampler with
lag k. Despite its appeal, this measure is problematic
because the higher order auto-correlations are hard to
estimate. To circumvent this problem, Pasarica and
Gelman (2010) introduced an objective measure called

The ESJD measure is efficient in situations where the
higher order auto-correlations increase monotonically
with respect to ρ1 . However, it is not suitable for
tuning HMC samplers since by increasing the number
of leapfrog steps one can almost always generate better
samples. What we need is a measure that also takes
computing time into consideration. With this goal in
mind, we introduce the following objective function:
Eγ kxt+1 − xt k2
ESJD(γ)
√
√
=
.
L
L
This function simply normalizes the ESJD by the number of leapfrog steps L, thus taking both statistical
efficiency and computation into consideration. Most
of our experiments will use this measure as we have
found it to work very well in practice. Many works in
the adaptive MCMC literature have considered matching empirical and theoretical acceptance rates in order
to adapt MCMC samplers; see for example Andrieu &
Robert (2001) or Vihola (2010). We have found this
strategy to perform poorly in the case of HMC, where
samplers with the same acceptance rate can exhibit
different mixing behavior (figure 1). When discussing
Bayesian neural networks in our experiments (section
5.4), we will introduce an alternative objective function based on predictive performance. Such a measure
does however only apply in predictive domains and is,
consequently, less general than the normalized ESJD
objective.
f (γ) =

Now that we are armed with an objective function,
we need to address the issue of optimization. Since
the objective is only available point-wise (that is, it
can be evaluated but its exact form is intractable), researchers typically use stochastic approximation. We
use Bayesian optimization to optimize the objective.
A discussion contrasting these two alternatives is presented in Hamze et al. (2013).
Bayesian optimization is an efficient gradient-free optimization tool well suited for expensive black box functions. Our objective function (normalized ESJD) is of
this nature. As mentioned earlier, normalized ESJD
involves an intractable expectation that can be approximated by sample averages, where the samples are produced by running HMC for a few iterations. Each set

Adaptive Hamiltonian and Riemann Manifold Monte Carlo Samplers

of HMC samples for a specific set of hyper-parameters
γ ∈ Γ results in a noisy evaluation of the normalized
ESJD: r(γ) = f (γ) + ε, where we assume that the
measurement noise is Gaussian ε ∼ N (0, ση2 ).
Following the standard Bayesian optimization methodology, we set Γ to be a box constraint such that
L
Γ = {(, L) :  ∈ [bl , bu ], L ∈ [bL
l , bu ]}
L
for some interval boundaries bl ≤ bu and bL
l ≤ bu . The
parameter L is discrete. The parameter  is continuous, but since it is one-dimensional, we can discretize
it using a very fine grid.

Since the true objective function is unknown, we specify a zero-mean Gaussian prior over it:

Algorithm 2 Adaptive HMC.
1: Given: Γ, m, k, α, and γ 1 .
2: for i = 1, 2, . . . , do
3:
Run HMC for m iterations with γ i = (i , Li ).
4:
Obtain the objective function value ri using the
drawn samples.
5:
Augment the data Di = {Di−1 , (γ i , ri )}.
6:
if ri > supj∈{1,··· ,i−1} rj then
7:
s = rαi
8:
end if
9:
Draw u ∼ U([0, 1])
10:
let pi = (max{i − k + 1, 1})−0.5 , with k ∈ N+ .
11:
if u < pi then
12:
γ i+1 := arg maxγ∈Γ u(γ, s|Di ).
13:
else
14:
γ i+1 := γ i
15:
end if
16: end for

f (·) ∼ GP (0, k(·, ·))
where k(·, ·) is the covariance function. Given noisy
evaluations of the objective function {rk }ik=1 evaluated at points {γk }ik=1 , we form the dataset Di =
{γ k }ik=1 , {rk }ik=1 . Using Bayes rule, we arrive at
the posterior predictive distribution over the unknown
objective function:
f |Di , γ ∼ N (µi (γ), σi2 (γ))
µi (γ) = kT (K + ση2 I)−1 ri
σi2 (γ) = k(γ, γ) − kT (K + ση2 I)−1 k
where

k(γ 1 , γ 1 ) . . .

..
..
K=
.
.
k(γ i , γ 1 )

...


k(γ 1 , γ i )

..
,
.
k(γ i , γ i )

k = [k(γ, γ 1 ) . . . k(γ, γ i )]T , and ri = [r1 . . . ri ]T .
In this work, we adopt a Gaussian ARD covariance function with k(γ i , γ j ) = exp(− 12 γ Ti Σ−1 γ j )
where
definite matrix.
We set Σ =
 Σ is a positive
 
2 
L 2
diag [α(bu − bl )] ; α(bL
−
b
)
,
where
α = 0.2.
u
l
For more details on Gaussian processes, please refer
to Rasmussen & Williams (2006).
The Gaussian process simply provides a surrogate
model for the true objective. The surrogate can be
used to search, efficiently, for the maximum of the objective function. In particular, it enables us to construct an acquisition function u(·) that tells us which
parameters γ to try next. The acquisition function
uses the Gaussian process posterior mean to predict
regions of potentially higher objective values (exploitation). It also uses the posterior variance to detect regions of high uncertainty (exploration). Moreover, it
effectively trades-off exploration and exploitation. Different acquisition functions have been proposed in the

literature (Močkus, 1982; Srinivas et al., 2010; Hoffman et al., 2011). We adopt a variant of the Upper
Confidence Bound (UCB) (Srinivas et al., 2010), modified to suit our application:
1
2
u(γ, s|Di ) = µi (γ, s) + pi βi+1
σi (γ).

As in standard
UCB, we set βi+1
=

d +2 2
2
2 log (i+1)3δ π , where d is the dimension of
Γ and δ is set to 0.1. The parameter pi ensures that
the diminishing adaptation condition for adaptive
MCMC (Roberts & Rosenthal, 2007) is satisfied.
Specifically, we set pi = (max{i − k + 1, 1})−0.5 for
some k ∈ N+ . As pi goes to 0, the probability of
Bayesian optimization adapting γ vanishes as shown
in Algorithm 2.
It could be argued that this acquisition function could
lead to premature exploitation, which may prevent
Bayesian optimization from locating the true optimum
of the objective function. There is some truth to
this argument. Our goal when adapting the Markov
chain, however, is less about finding the absolute best
hyper-parameters but more about finding sufficiently
good hyper-parameters given finite computational resources. Given enough time, we could slow the annealing schedule thus allowing Bayesian optimization
to explore the hyper-parameter space fully. However,
under time constraints we must use faster annealing
schedules. As pi decreases, it becomes increasingly difficult for Bayesian optimization to propose new hyperparameters for HMC. Consequently, the sampler ends
up using the same set of hyper-parameters for many
iterations. With this in mind, we argue, it is more
reasonable to exploit known good hyper-parameters
rather than exploring for better ones. This intuition
matches our experience when conducting experiments.

Adaptive Hamiltonian and Riemann Manifold Monte Carlo Samplers

The acquisition function also includes a scalar
scale-invariance parameter s, such that µi (γ, s) =
kT (K + ση2 I)−1 ri s. This parameter is estimated automatically so as to rescale the rewards to the same
range each time we encounter a new maximal reward.
Gaussian processes require the inversion of the covariance matrix and, hence, have complexity O(i3 ), where
i is the number of iterations. Fortunately, thanks to
our annealing schedule, the number of unique points in
our Gaussian process grows sub-linearly with the number of iterations. This slow growth makes it possible to
adopt kernel specification techniques, as proposed by
Engel (2005), to drastically reduce the computational
cost without suffering any loss in accuracy.
Finally, in all our experiments, we set α = 4, k = 100,
m= B
k , where B is the number of burn-in samples. In
our experience, the algorithm is robust with respect
to these settings and we used the same set of parameters throughout our experiments with the exception
of Γ. Γ is easy to set, since one can choose the bound
to be large enough to contain all reasonable  and L,
while allowing the adaptive algorithm enough time to
explore. Alternatively, one could gauge the hardness
of the sampling problem at hand and set more reasonable bounds. In general, harder sampling problems
require a smaller  and a larger L. We follow this second strategy throughout our experiments and found
that most sensible bounds led to performance similar
to the ones reported.

4. Analysis of Convergence
The proof of ergodicity of the adaptive HMC algorithm
capitalizes on existing results for Langevin diffusions
and adaptive MCMC on compact state spaces. The
method of proof is based on the standard Lyapunov
stability functions, also known as drift or potential
functions.
We assume that our target distribution is compactly
supported on M. In practice, for target distributions
that are not compactly supported, we could set M
large enough to contain most of the mass of our target distribution. The sampler is restricted to M by
following this standard approach of rejecting all proposals that fall outside M.
Let {Pγ }γ∈Γ be a collection of Markov chain kernels,
each admitting π as the stationary distribution. That
is, for each value of γ = (, L), we have one such kernel.
Moreover, let Pγn denote the n-step Markov kernel.
Our proof requires the following classical definitions:
Definition 1. (Small set) A subset of the state space
C ⊆ X is small if there exists n0 ∈ N+ , ξ > 0 and a

probability measure ν(.) such that P n0 (x, ·) ≥ ξν(·)
∀x ∈ C.
Definition 2. (Drift condition) A Markov chain
satisfies the drift condition if for a small set C, there
exist constants 0 < λ < 1 and b < ∞, and a function
V : X → [1, ∞] such that ∀x ∈ X
Z
P (x, dy)V (y) ≤ λV (x) + b1C (x).
X

Having defined the necessary concepts, we now move
on to show the ergodicity of our adapted approach.
Proposition 3. Suppose that Pγ , when restricted to
a compact set M, admits the stationary distribution π
for all γ ∈ Γ. If π is continuous, positive and bounded
on M, and |Γ| is finite, then the adaptive HMC sampler is ergodic.
Proof. To show that adaptive HMC converges on a
compact set, we first show that M is a small set.
The transition kernel of the random time
algoPL HMC
1
Q
rithm can be written as Pγ (x, .) =
l=1 L l, (x, .)
where Ql, (x, .) is the transition kernel of an HMC
sampler that takes l leapfrog steps with parameter
. In particular Q1, (x, .) is the transition kernel of
Metropolis adjusted Langevin algorithm (MALA). As
π is bounded, and the proposal distribution of MALA
is positive every where, we have that Q1, is µLeb irreducible. By a slight modification of Theorem 2-2
in Roberts & Tweedie (1996), for Markov chains defined by MALA, and any compact set C with positive Lebesgue measure (i.e. µLeb (C) > 0) there exists
ξ > 0 and a probability measure ν(·) such that ∀x ∈ C
Q11, (x, .) ≥ ξν(.). Hence, M is a small set since
Pγ1 (x, .) ≥

1
1 1
Q (x, .) ≥ ξν(.)
L 1,
L

for any compact set C where µLeb (C) > 0. The drift
condition is trivially satisfied by each HMC sampler
when we choose C to be M, and V to be such that
V (x) = 1 for all x.
Having proved these conditions, we can now appeal to
Theorem 15.0.1 of Meyn & Tweedie (1993) to conclude
that kPγn (x, ·) − π(·)k < Rγ V (x)ρnγ for all n and for
0 < ργ < 1. Since V (X) = 1 ∀x, we have
kPγn (x, ·) − π(·)k < Rγ ρnγ .
Define Rmax = supγ∈Γ Rγ and ρmax = supγ∈Γ ργ , then
∀x ∈ M and ∀γ ∈ Γ we have
kPγn (x, ·) − π(·)k < Rmax ρnmax .

Adaptive Hamiltonian and Riemann Manifold Monte Carlo Samplers

We have shown that the kernels {Pγ (x, ·)}γ∈Γ are simultaneously uniformly ergodic. Also, the adaptive
HMC sampler has diminishing adaptation by design.
By Theorem 5 of Roberts & Rosenthal (2007), these
two conditions imply the claim of our proposition.
In general two sets of conditions together guarantee
ergodicity of an adaptive MCMC algorithm (Roberts
& Rosenthal, 2007; Atchadé & Fort, 2010). First, the
adaptation has to diminish eventually. The second
set of conditions is usually placed on the underlying
MCMC samplers. In Roberts & Rosenthal (2007), the
samplers are required to be either simultaneously uniformly or geometrically ergodic. Without restricting
the state space to be compact, it is unlikely that HMC
is uniformly ergodic. Also, to the best of our knowledge, no theoretical results exist on the geometric ergodicity of HMC when the state space is not compact. However, Roberts & Stramer (2002) showed
that Langevin diffusion, which is closely related to
HMC, is geometrically ergodic. Thus one potential
challenge would be to prove or disprove geometric ergodicity of HMC in general state spaces. Atchadé &
Fort (2010) weakened the conditions required, still requiring diminishing adaptation, but the requirements
on the underlying MCMC samplers were reduced to
sub-geometric ergodicity. Although these conditions
are weaker, it remains hard to check whether HMC
satisfies them.

5. Results
We show the performance of our adaptive algorithm
on four widely-used models. We evaluate the performance of the samplers using the
P effective sample size
(ESS) using: ESS = R (1 + 2 k P
ρk ), where R is the
number of posterior samples, and k ρk is the sum of
K monotone sample auto-correlations computed using
the monotone sequence estimator (Girolami & Calderhead, 2011). We adopt the total number of leapfrog
steps used in producing the set of samples as a proxy
for computational demand, since the computation is
dominated by the gradient evaluation required for each
leapfrog step. An efficient sampler will result in the
highest ESS for the least computation, and we will
thus report the effective sample size per leapfrog step
used (ESS/L), similarly to Hoffman & Gelman (2011),
since this takes into account computational requirements. We compute the ESS/L over all dimensions of
the target distribution and report the minimum, median and maximum ESS obtained. While we report
all three summary statistics, we focus on the minimum ESS/L as the most useful measure, since this
allows us to evaluate the efficiency of the most con-

fined coordinate, and is more indicative of ESS jointly
over all coordinates rather than, as computed, over every coordinate independently (Neal, 2010; Girolami &
Calderhead, 2011).
We compare our adaptive HMC to NUTS, and extend our approach and compare an adaptive version
of RMHMC to the standard RMHMC. For NUTS,
we tuned the free parameters of its dual averaging
algorithm to obtain the best performance, and for
RMHMC we use the experimental protocol and code
used by Girolami & Calderhead (2011). We do this
for all experiments in this section. Code to reproduce
these results will be available online.
5.1. Bayesian Logistic Regression
We consider a data set X consisting of N observations
and D features or covariates, and a binary label y.
Using regression coefficients β and bias β0 the joint
distribution for the logistic regression model is:
log p(X,y,β,β0 ) ∝ log p(y|X,β,β0 )+log p(β)+log p(β0 )
X
 β02 β >β
= − log 1+exp −yi (β0 +x>
β)
− 2 − 2 , (1)
i
2σ
2σ
i
where yi ∈ {−1, 1}, and σ 2 is the prior variance of
the regression coefficients. We present results on five
data sets from the UCI repository. The data sets have
varying characteristics with features D ranging from
2 to 24, and the number of observations from 250 to
1000. For each data set, we generate 5000 samples
after a burnin phase of 1000 samples, and repeat this
process 10 times using differing starting points. The
top row of figure 2 compares the performance of our
adaptive HMC (AHMC) to NUTS, while the bottom
row compares our adaptive RMHMC (ARMHMC) to
RMHMC. For this experiment, for AHMC, we set Γ
such that  ∈ [0.01, 0.2] and L ∈ {0, · · · , 100}, and for
ARMHMC, we use  ∈ [0.1, 1] and L ∈ {1, · · · , 12}.
The columns of figure 2 shows box plots of the
minimum, median and maximum ESS/L values obtained. We see that the adaptive methods (AHMC
and ARMHMC) exhibit good performance. For the
minimum ESS/L, AHMC has better (higher) values
that NUTS for all the data sets, and this behavior is
consistent across most other data sets for the other
summary statistics. Thus AHMC typically provides
better performance and a higher effective number of
samples per unit of computation used than NUTS. We
also see that the ARMHMC can improve RMHMC and
provide better ESS/L on what is already a highly efficient sampler.

Adaptive Hamiltonian and Riemann Manifold Monte Carlo Samplers

600

600

400

400

200

200
Pima

Heart Australian

3000

0

1000

25

500

German Ripley

Pima

Heart Australian

0

3000

3000

2500

2500

ESS/L
700

Minimum
Median
Maximum

600
500

20

German Ripley

Pima

Heart Australian

15

2000

2000

2000

1500

1500

1500

1000

1000

1000

German Ripley

300

10

5

500

400

200

ARMHMC
RMHMC

2500

ESS/L
30

NUTS

HMC Samplers

800

German Ripley

Maximum ESS/L
1500

1000

800

0

RMHMC Samplers

Median ESS/L
1200

AHMC
NUTS

1000

RMHMC

Minimum ESS/L
1200

Pima

Heart Australian

500

German Ripley

Pima

Heart Australian

500

0
0

100

5

10

15

20

25

30

0
0

100

AHMC
German Ripley

Pima

200

300

400

500

600

700

ARMHMC

Heart Australian

Figure 2. Box plots comparing ESS/L for Bayesian logistic regression. Top row: AHMC vs NUTS. Bottom row:
ARMHMC vs RMHMC.

Figure 3. Comparing minimum (red), median (blue) and
maximum (black) ESS/L for the Log-Gaussian Cox model.
Each of the colored glyphs represents one of the 10 chains
generated.

5.2. Log-Gaussian Cox Point Process

X
i,j

1
yij xij −d exp(xij )− (x−µ1)> Σ−1 (x−µ1). (2)
2

We generate samples jointly for x, σ, µ, β using a grid
of size d = 64, using a synthetic data set obtained by
drawing from the generative process for this model.
We generate 5000 samples after a burnin of 1000
samples. For this model, we use L ∈ {1, · · · , 500},
 ∈ [0.001, 0.1] for AHMC, and use L ∈ {1, · · · , 60},
 ∈ [0.01, 1] for ARMHMC. We compare the performance of the adaptive method we presented in terms
of ESS per leapfrog step in figure 3. We compare
AHMC versus NUTS and ARMHMC versus RMHMC,
showing the minimum, median and maximum ESS
per leapfrog step obtained for 10 chains with dispersed starting points. We see that almost all points
lie below the diagonal line, which indicates that the
AHMC and ARMHMC have better ESS/L compared
to NUTS and RMHMC, respectively. Thus even for
high-dimensional models with strong correlations our
adaptive method allows for automatic tuning of the
sampler and consequently the ability to obtain higher
quality samples than with competing methods.
We examine the quality of the posterior distribution

Latent Process λ

Variance

AHMC

True Data

Latent Field x

NUTS

We model a data set Y = {yij } that consists of counts
at locations (i, j), i, j = 1 . . . , d in a regular spatial grid
using a log-Gaussian Cox point process (LGC) (Christensen et al., 2005; Girolami & Calderhead, 2011). Observations yij are Poisson distributed and conditionally independent given a latent intensity process Λ =
{λij } with means sλij = s exp(xij ), where s = d12 .
The rates X = {xij } are obtained from a Gaussian
process with mean function m(xij ) = µ1 and covari2
0
0
ance function Σ(xij , xp
i0 j 0 ) = σ exp (−δ(i, i , j, j )/βd),
where δ(i, i0 , j, j 0 ) = (i − i0 )2 + (j − j 0 )2 . The joint
probability log p(y, x|µ, σ, β) is proportional to:

Figure 4. Comparing quality of posterior distributions
from samples obtained using AHMC and NUTS for the
log-Gaussian Cox model. The top-right image shows the
locations of the true data.

obtained for AHMC and NUTS in figure 4, by visualizing the latent field and its variance, and comparing to
the true data (which is known for this data set). The
top row shows the true latent fields. From the true
data observations (shown in top right corner), we see
that there are few data points in this region and thus
we expect to have a high variance in this region. The
average of the samples obtained using AHMC shows
that we can accurately obtain samples from the latent
field x, and that the samples have a variance matching
our expectations. While NUTS is able to also produce
good samples of the latent field, the variance of the
field is not well captured (bottom right image).

Adaptive Hamiltonian and Riemann Manifold Monte Carlo Samplers
Table 1. Comparative results for the stochastic volatility
model.
Sampler
AHMC
NUTS

ESS
minimum
1.3 ± 0.1
0.7 ± 0.3

per Leapfrog
median
maximum
6.9 ± 0.7
14.9 ±1.4
3.5 ±1.6
9 ±2.8

5.3. Stochastic Volatility
We consider a stochastic volatility model described by
Kim et al. (1998) and Girolami & Calderhead (2011),
in which we consider observations yt , regularly spaced
in time for t = 1, . . . , T . Each yt is specified using a
latent variable xt , which represents the log-volatility
following auto-regressive AR(1) dynamics. The model
is specified as:
yt =t β exp (0.5xt ) ,
xt+1 =φxt + ηt+1 ,


σ2
,
x1 ∼N 0,
1 − φ2

t ∼N (0, 1)

(3)

2

ηt+1 ∼N (0, σ )

(4)

1
p(β) ∝ .
β

(5)

For stationarity of the log-volatility, |φ| < 1, and the
standard deviation σ > 0, whose priors we set to
φ+1
∼ Beta(20, 1.5) and σ 2 ∼ inv-χ2 (10, 0.05), re2
spectively. The parameters to be sampled by HMC is
thus Θ = {x, β, φ, σ 2 }, and the joint probability is:
T
Y
p(y,Θ)= p(yt |xt , β)p(xt |xt−1 , φ, σ 2)p(β)p(σ 2)p(φ). (6)
t=1

We make use of the transformations σ = exp(γ) and
φ = tanh(α) to ensure that we sample using unconstrained variables; the use of this transformation
requires the addition of the Jacobian of the transformation of variables. We generate samples jointly
using our AHMC methods, using training data with
T = 2000. For our experiments, we use a burnin period of 10, 000 samples and thereafter generate 20, 000
posterior samples. We restrict our box constraint such
that L ∈ {1, · · · , 300},  ∈ [10−4 , 10−2 ]. We show the
results comparing ESS for the two methods in table
1. These results again show higher values for ESS per
leapfrog step, demonstrating that a better performing sampler can be obtained using AHMC – further
demonstrating the advantages of AHMC methods for
sampling from complex hierarchical models.

challenge, which is a subset of the well-known Reuters
text categorization benchmark. The winning entries
submitted by Neal & Zhang (2006) used a number of
feature selection techniques followed by a combination
of Bayesian Neural Networks and Dirichlet diffusion
trees. The entry that used only BNNs was placed second and achieved highly competitive results (Guyon
et al., 2005).
The BNN model consists of 295 input features and
2 hidden layers with 20 and 8 hidden units respectively. The input features are selected from the full set
of features through univariate feature selection. The
weights and bias as well as a few other parameters of
this particular network adds up to form a 6097 dimensional state space for the HMC sampler.
For this model, we use cross-validation to construct
the reward signal. We divide the data into n sets,
and train n BNNs each on n − 1 sets and test them
on the remaining set like in the case of normal crossvalidation. The cross-validation error is then used to
calculate the reward. To take computation into account, we always evaluate the reward over the same
number of leapfrog steps, i.e. for each evaluation of
the reward we use a different number of samples and
a different number of leapfrog steps for each sample,
but the product of the two remains constant.
We compare the results in table 2, where the performance measure is the prediction error on a test set
(unknown to us) and was obtained after submission
to the competition system. The improved results obtained using the AHMC strategy are clear from the table, also demonstrating that good adaptation can be
preferable to the introduction of more sophisticated
models.
Table 2. Classification error on the test set of the Dexter
data set. The table shows the mean and the median prediction errors of our 8 BNNs trained as in cross-validation.
The majority vote of these 8 networks achieves slightly
better results than that of a more sophisticated model involving Dirichlet diffusion trees.
Method
Expert-tuned HMC for BNN
AHMC for BNN (Mean error)
AHMC for BNN (Median error)
Winning entry (using Dirichlet Diffusion Trees)
AHMC for BNN + Majority Voting

Error
0.0510
0.0498
0.0458
0.0390
0.0355

5.4. Bayesian Neural Networks
We demonstrate the application of our adaptive approach using Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) to
show that AHMC allows for more effective sampling
of posterior parameters even when compared to samplers finely tuned by an expert. We make use of the
Dexter data set from the NIPS 2003 feature selection

6. Discussion and Conclusion
In section 3 we described the use the expected squared
jumping distance as a suitable objective. Several other
objectives, such as the mean update distance, crossvalidation error and the cumulative auto-correlation,
are also suitable, and their use depends on the

Adaptive Hamiltonian and Riemann Manifold Monte Carlo Samplers

particular modelling problem. In many machine
learning tasks, researchers design MCMC algorithms
to estimate model parameters and, subsequently,
evaluate these models using cross-validation, such as
the competition task in section 5.4. Moreover, often
researchers modify their samplers so as to reduce
test set error. In this paper, we demonstrate the use
of predictive losses, such as cross-validation error,
to guide the adaptation. This approach, although
never reported before to the best of our knowledge,
simply makes the tuning process followed by many
researchers explicit. Ultimately the models whose
parameters we are estimating by running a Markov
chain will be tested on predictive tasks. Hence, it
is natural to use predictive performance on such
predictive tasks to improve the exploration of the
posterior distribution. Of course, these objective
measures are only applicable when sufficient data is
available to obtain good predictive estimates.
We addressed the widely-experienced difficulty
in tuning Hamiltonian-based Monte Carlo samplers
by developing algorithms for infinite adaptation of
these Markov chains using Bayesian optimization.
The adaptive Hamiltonian Monte Carlo and adaptive
Riemann manifold HMC we developed automate the
process of finding the best parameters that control
the performance of the sampler, removing the need
for time-consuming and expert-driven tuning of these
samplers. Our experiments show conclusively that
over a wide range of models and data sets, the use
of adaptive algorithms makes it easy to obtain more
efficient samplers, in some cases precluding the need
for more complex approaches. Hamiltonian-based
Monte Carlo samplers are widely known to be an
excellent choice of MCMC method, and we hope that
this paper removes a key obstacle towards the more
widespread use of these samplers in practice.
References
Andrieu, Christophe and Robert, Christian. Controlled
MCMC for optimal sampling. Technical Report 0125,
Cahiers de Mathematiques du Ceremade, Universite
Paris-Dauphine, 2001.
Andrieu, Christophe, de Freitas, Nando, Doucet, Arnaud,
and Jordan, Michael I. An Introduction to MCMC for
Machine Learning. Machine Learning, 50(1):5–43, 2003.
Atchadé, Yves and Fort, Gersende. Limit theorems for
some adaptive MCMC algorithms with subgeometric
kernels. Bernoulli, 16(1):116–154, 2010.
Beskos, Alexandros, Pillai, Natesh S., Roberts, Gareth O.,
Sanz-Serna, Jesus M., and Stuart, Andrew M. Optimal
tuning of the hybrid Monte-Carlo algorithm. Preprint
arXiv:1001.4460, 2010.

Brochu, Eric, Cora, Vlad M, and de Freitas, Nando. A tutorial on Bayesian optimization of expensive cost functions. Preprint arXiv:1012.2599, 2009.
Chen, Lingyu, Qin, Zhaohui, and Liu, Jun S. Exploring
Hybrid Monte Carlo in Bayesian Computation. Sigma,
2:2–5, 2001.
Christensen, Ole F., Roberts, Gareth O., and Rosenthal,
Jeffrey S. Scaling limits for the transient phase of local
Metropolis–Hastings algorithms. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series B, 67(2):253–268, 2005.
Duane, S, Kennedy, A D, Pendleton, B J, and Roweth, D.
Hybrid Monte Carlo. Physics Letters B, 195(2):216–222,
1987.
Engel, Yaakov. Algorithms and representations for reinforcement learning. Doktorarbeit, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 2005.
Girolami, Mark and Calderhead, Ben. Riemann manifold
Langevin and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo methods. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B, 73(2):123–
214, 2011.
Guyon, Isabelle, Gunn, Steve, Ben-Hur, Asa, and Dror,
Gideon. Result analysis of the NIPS 2003 feature selection challenge. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 17, pp. 545–552, 2005.
Hamze, Firas, Wang, Ziyu, and de Freitas, Nando. Selfavoiding random dynamics on integer complex systems.
ACM Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation, 23(1):9:1–9:25, 2013.
Hoffman, Matthew, Brochu, Eric, and de Freitas, Nando.
Portfolio allocation for Bayesian optimization. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 327–336, 2011.
Hoffman, Matthew D and Gelman, Andrew. The NoU-Turn Sampler: Adaptively setting path lengths in
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. Preprint arXiv:1111.4246,
2011.
Ishwaran, Hemant. Applications of hybrid Monte Carlo to
Bayesian generalized linear models: Quasicomplete separation and neural networks. Journal of Computational
and Graphical Statistics, 8(4):779–799, 1999.
Kim, Sangjoon, Shephard, Neil, and Chib, Siddhartha.
Stochastic volatility: likelihood inference and comparison with ARCH models. The Review of Economic Studies, 65(3):361–393, 1998.
Mahendran, Nimalan, Wang, Ziyu, Hamze, Firas, and
de Freitas, Nando. Adaptive MCMC with Bayesian optimization. Articial Intelligence and Statistics, 2012.
Meyn, Sean P. and Tweedie, Richard L. Markov chains
and stochastic stability. Springer-Verlag, 1993.
Močkus, Jonas. The Bayesian approach to global optimization. In System Modeling and Optimization, volume 38,
pp. 473–481. Springer, 1982.
Mohamed, Shakir, Heller, Katherine, and Ghahramani,
Zoubin. Bayesian exponential family PCA. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1089–
1096. 2008.
Neal, R. and Zhang, J. High dimensional classification with
Bayesian neural networks and Dirichlet diffusion trees.
In Feature Extraction, pp. 265–296. Springer, 2006.
Neal, Radford M. MCMC using Hamiltonian dynamics.

Adaptive Hamiltonian and Riemann Manifold Monte Carlo Samplers
Handbook of Markov Chain Monte Carlo, 54:113–162,
2010.
Pasarica, Cristian and Gelman, Andrew. Adaptively scaling the Metropolis algorithm using expected squared
jumped distance. Statistica Sinica, 20(1):343, 2010.
Ranzato, Marc’Aurelio and Hinton, Geoffrey. Modeling
pixel means and covariances using factorized third-order
Boltzmann machines. In IEEE Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 2551–2558, 2010.
Rasmussen, Carl Edward and Williams, Christopher K I.
Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning. MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2006.
Roberts, Gareth O. and Rosenthal, Jeffrey S. Coupling
and ergodicity of adaptive Markov chain Monte Carlo
algorithms. Journal of applied probability, 44(2):458–
475, 2007.
Roberts, Gareth O. and Stramer, Osnat. Langevin diffu-

sions and Metropolis-Hastings algorithms. Methodology
and computing in applied probability, 4(4):337–357, 2002.
Roberts, Gareth O and Tweedie, Richard L. Geometric
convergence and central limit theorems for multidimensional Hastings and Metropolis algorithms. Biometrika,
83(1):95–110, 1996.
Snoek,
Jasper,
Larochelle,
Hugo,
and Adams,
Ryan Prescott. Practical Bayesian optimization of
machine learning algorithms. In Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2012.
Srinivas, Niranjan, Krause, Andreas, Kakade, Sham M.,
and Seeger, Matthias. Gaussian process optimization in
the bandit setting: No regret and experimental design.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2010.
Vihola, Matti. Grapham: Graphical models with adaptive random walk Metropolis algorithms. Computational
Statistics and Data Analysis, 54(1):49 – 54, 2010.

