
FOX, HUGHES, SUDDERTH AND JORDAN

locally coherent and simple dynamics that persist over a segment of time.
We have such motion capture recordings from multiple individuals, each of
whom performs some subset of a global set of exercises, as shown in Figure 1. Our goal is to discover the set of global exercise types (“behaviors”)
and their occurrences in each individual’s data stream. We would like to
take advantage of the overlap between individuals: if a jumping-jack behavior is discovered in one sequence, then it can be used to model data for other
individuals. This allows a combinatorial form of shrinkage involving subsets
of behaviors from a global collection.
A flexible yet simple method of describing single time series with such patterned behaviors is the class of Markov switching processes. These processes
assume that the time series can be described via Markov transitions between
a set of latent dynamic behaviors which are individually modeled via temporally independent linear dynamical systems. Examples include the hidden
Markov model (HMM), switching vector autoregressive (VAR) process, and
switching linear dynamical system (SLDS). These models have proven useful in such diverse fields as speech recognition, econometrics, neuroscience,
remote target tracking, and human motion capture. In this paper, we focus our attention on the descriptive yet computationally tractable class of
switching VAR processes. Here, the state of the underlying Markov process
encodes the behavior exhibited at a given time step, and each dynamic behavior defines a VAR process. That is, conditioned on the Markov-evolving
state, the likelihood is simply a VAR model with time-varying parameters.
To discover the dynamic behaviors shared between multiple time series,
we propose a feature-based model. The entire collection of time series can
be described by a globally shared set of possible behaviors. Individually,
however, each time series will only exhibit a subset of these behaviors. The
goal of joint analysis is to discover which behaviors are shared among the
time series and which are unique. We represent the behaviors possessed by
time series i with a binary feature vector fi , with fik = 1 indicating that time
series i uses global behavior k (see Figure 1). We seek a prior for these feature
vectors which allows flexibility in the number of behaviors and encourages
the sharing of behaviors. Our desiderata motivate a feature-based Bayesian
nonparametric approach based on the beta process [Hjort (1990), Thibaux
and Jordan (2007)]. Such an approach allows for infinitely many potential
behaviors, but encourages a sparse representation. Given a fixed feature set,
our model reduces to a collection of finite Bayesian VAR processes with
partially shared parameters.
We refer to our model as the beta-process autoregressive hidden Markov
model, or BP-AR-HMM. We also consider a simplified version of this model,
referred to as the BP-HMM, in which the AR emission models are replaced
with a set of conditionally independent emissions. Preliminary versions of
these models were partially described in Fox et al. (2009) and in Hughes, Fox

JOINT MODELING OF MULTIPLE TIME SERIES VIA THE BETA PROCESS 3

Fig. 1. Motivating data set: 6 sequences of motion capture data [CMU (2009)], with
manual annotations. Top: Skeleton visualizations of 12 possible exercise behavior types
observed across all sequences. Middle left: Binary feature assignment matrix F produced
by manual annotation. Each row indicates which exercises are present in a particular sequence. Middle right: Discrete segmentations z of all six time series into the 12 possible
exercises, produced by manual annotation. Bottom: Sequence 2’s observed multivariate
time series data. Motion capture sensors measure 12 joint angles every 0.1 seconds. Proposed model: The BP-AR-HMM takes as input the observed time series sensor data across
multiple sequences. It aims to recover the global behavior set, the binary assignments F,
and the detailed segmentations z. When segmenting each sequence, our model only uses
behaviors which are present in the corresponding row of F.

and Sudderth (2012), who developed improved Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) inference procedures for the BP-AR-HMM. In the current article
we provide a unified and comprehensive description of the model and we
also take further steps toward the development of an efficient inference algo-

4

FOX, HUGHES, SUDDERTH AND JORDAN

rithm for the BP-AR-HMM. In particular, the unbounded nature of the set
of possible behaviors available to our approach presents critical challenges
during posterior inference. To efficiently explore the space, we introduce two
novel MCMC proposal moves: (1) split-merge moves to efficiently change the
feature structure for many sequences at once, and (2) data-driven reversible
jump moves to add or delete features unique to one sequence. We expect
the foundational ideas underlying both contributions (split-merge and datadriven birth–death) to generalize to other nonparametric models beyond the
time-series domain. Building on an earlier version of these ideas in Hughes,
Fox and Sudderth (2012), we show how to perform data-driven birth–death
proposals using only discrete assignment variables (marginalizing away continuous HMM parameters), and demonstrate that annealing the Hastings
term in the acceptance ratio can dramatically improve performance.
Our presentation is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces motion capture data. In Section 3 we present our proposed beta-process-based model
for multiple time series. Section 4 provides a formal specification of all prior
distributions, while Section 5 summarizes the model. Efficient posterior computations based on an MCMC algorithm are developed in Section 6. The
algorithm does not rely on model truncation; instead, we exploit the finite
dynamical system induced by a fixed set of features to sample efficiently,
while using data-driven reversible jump proposals to explore new features.
Section 7 introduces our novel split-merge proposals, which allow the sampler to make large-scale improvements across many variables simultaneously.
In Section 8 we describe related work. Finally, in Section 9 we present results on unsupervised segmentation of data from the CMU motion capture
database [CMU (2009)]. Further details on our algorithms and experiments
are available in the supplemental article [Fox et al. (2014)].
2. Motion capture data. Our data consists of motion capture recordings
taken from the CMU MoCap database (http://mocap.cs.cmu.edu). From
the available set of 62 positions and joint angles, we examine 12 measurements deemed most informative for the gross motor behaviors we wish to
capture: one body torso position, one neck angle, two waist angles, and a
symmetric pair of right and left angles at each subject’s shoulders, wrists,
knees, and feet. As such, each recording provides us with a 12-dimensional
time series. A collection of several recordings serves as the observed data
which our model analyzes.
An example data set of six sequences is shown in Figure 1. This data set
contains three sequences from Subject 13 and three from Subject 14. These
sequences were chosen because they had many exercises in common, such as
“squat” and “jog,” while also containing several unique behaviors appearing
in only one sequence, such as “side bend.” Additionally, we have human annotations of these sequences, identifying which of 12 exercise behaviors was

JOINT MODELING OF MULTIPLE TIME SERIES VIA THE BETA PROCESS 5

present at each time step, as shown in Figure 1. These human segmentations
serve as ground-truth for assessing the accuracy of our model’s estimated
segmentations (see Section 9). In addition to analyzing this small data set,
we also consider a much larger 124 sequence data set in Section 9.
3. A featural model for relating multiple time series. In our applications
of interest, we are faced with a collection of N time series representing realizations of related dynamical phenomena. Our goal is to discover dynamic
behaviors shared between the time series. Through this process, we can infer
how the data streams relate to one another as well as harness the shared
structure to pool observations from the same behavior, thereby improving
our estimates of the dynamic parameters.
We begin by describing a model for the dynamics of each individual time
series. We then describe a mechanism for representing dynamics which are
shared between multiple data streams. Our Bayesian nonparametric prior
specification plays a key role in this model, by addressing the challenge
of allowing for uncertainty in the number of dynamic behaviors exhibited
within and shared across data streams.
3.1. Per-series dynamics. We model the dynamics of each time series
as a Markov switching process (MSP). Most simply, one could consider a
hidden Markov model (HMM) [Rabiner (1989)]. For observations yt ∈ Rd
and hidden state zt , the HMM assumes
zt |zt−1 ∼ πzt−1 ,

(1)

yt |zt ∼ F (θzt ),

for an indexed family of distributions F (·). Here, πk is the state-specific
transition distribution and θk the emission parameters for state k.
The modeling assumption of the HMM that observations are conditionally independent given the latent state sequence is insufficient to capture the
temporal dependencies present in human motion data streams. Instead, one
can assume that the observations have conditionally linear dynamics. Each
latent HMM state then models a single linear dynamical system, and over
time the model can switch between dynamical modes by switching among
the states. We restrict our attention in this paper to switching vector autoregressive (VAR) processes, or autoregressive HMMs (AR-HMMs), which
are both broadly applicable and computationally practical.
We consider an AR-HMM where, conditioned on the latent state zt , the
observations evolve according to a state-specific order-r VAR process:3
r
X
yt =
(2)
Aℓ,zt yt−ℓ + et (zt ) = Ak ỹt + et (zt ),
ℓ=1

3

We denote an order-r VAR process by VAR(r).

6

FOX, HUGHES, SUDDERTH AND JORDAN

T ]T are the aggregated
T
· · · yt−1
where et (zt ) ∼ N (0, Σzt ) and ỹt = [ yt−1
past observations. We refer to Ak = [ A1,k · · · Ar,k ] as the set of lag matrices. Note that an HMM with zero-mean Gaussian emissions arises as a
special case of this model when Ak = 0 for all k. Throughout, we denote the
VAR parameters for the kth state as θk = {Ak , Σk } and refer to each VAR
process as a dynamic behavior. For example, these parameters might each
define a linear motion model for the behaviors walking, running, jumping,
and so on; our time series are then each modeled as Markov switches between these behaviors. We will sometimes refer to k itself as a “behavior,”
where the intended meaning is the VAR model parameterized by θk .

3.2. Relating multiple time series. There are many ways in which a collection of data streams may be related. In our applications of interest, our N
time series are related by the overlap in the set of dynamic behaviors each
exhibits. Given exercise routines from N actors, we expect both sharing and
variability: some people may switch between walking and running, while
others switch between running and jumping. Formally, we define a shared
set of dynamic behaviors {θ1 , θ2 , . . .}. We then associate some subset of these
behaviors with each time series i via a binary feature vector fi = [fi1 , fi2 , . . .].
Setting fik = 1 implies that time series i exhibits behavior k for some subset
of values t ∈ {1, . . . , Ti }, where Ti is the length of the ith time series.
The feature vectors are used to define a set of feature-constrained transition distributions that restrict each time series i to only switch between
(i)
its set of selected behaviors, as indicated by fi . Let πk denote the feature(i)
constrained transition distribution from state k for time series i. Then, πk
P (i)
satisfies j πkj = 1, and

 π (i) = 0,
if fij = 0,
kj
(3)
 π (i) > 0,
if fij = 1.
kj
See Figure 2. Note that here we assume that the frequency at which the time
series switch between the selected behaviors might be time-series-specific.

(i)

Fig. 2. Illustration of generating feature-constrained transition distributions πj . Each
time series’ binary feature vector fi limits the support of the transition distribution to the
sparse set of selected dynamic behaviors. The nonzero components are Dirichlet distributed,
as described by equation (12). The feature vectors are as in Figure 1.

JOINT MODELING OF MULTIPLE TIME SERIES VIA THE BETA PROCESS 7

That is, although two actors may both run and walk, they may alternate
between these behaviors in different manners.
The observations for each data stream then follow an MSP defined by the
feature-constrained transition distributions. Although the methodology described thus far applies equally well to HMMs and other MSPs, henceforth
we focus our attention on the AR-HMM and develop the full model specification and inference procedures needed to treat our motivating example of
(i)
visual motion capture. Specifically, let yt represent the observed value of
(i)
the ith time series at time t, and let zt denote the latent dynamical state.
Assuming an order-r AR-HMM as defined in equation (2), we have
(i)

(i)

zt |zt−1 ∼ π
(4)

(i)

(i)
(i)

zt−1

,
(i)

(i)

yt |zt ∼ N (Az (i) ỹt , Σz (i) ).
t

t

Conditioned on the set of feature vectors, fi , for i = 1, . . . , N , the model
reduces to a collection of N switching VAR processes, each defined on the
finite state space formed by the set of selected behaviors for that time series.
The dynamic behaviors θk = {Ak , Σk } are shared across all time series. The
(i)
feature-constrained transition distributions πj restrict time series i to select
among the dynamic behaviors available in its feature vector fi . Each time
(i)
step t is assigned to one behavior, according to assignment variable zt .
This proposed featural model has several advantages. By discovering the
pattern of behavior sharing (i.e., discovering fik = fjk = 1 for some pair of
sequences i, j), we can interpret how the time series relate to one another.
Additionally, behavior-sharing allows multiple sequences to pool observations from the same behavior, improving estimates of θk .
4. Prior specification. To maintain an unbounded set of possible behaviors, we take a Bayesian nonparametric approach and define a model for a
globally shared set of infinitely many possible dynamic behaviors. We first
explore a prior specification for the corresponding infinite-dimensional feature vectors fi . We then address the challenge of defining a prior on infinitedimensional transition distributions with support constraints defined by the
feature vectors.
4.1. Feature vectors. Inferring the structure of behavior sharing within a
Bayesian framework requires defining a prior on the feature inclusion probabilities. Since we want to maintain an unbounded set of possible behaviors (and thus require infinite-dimensional feature vectors), we appeal to a
Bayesian nonparametric featural model based on the beta process-Bernoulli
process. Informally, one can think of the formulation in our case as follows. A

8

FOX, HUGHES, SUDDERTH AND JORDAN

P
beta process (BP) random measure, B = k ωk δθk , defines an infinite set of
coin-flipping probabilities ωk —one for each behavior θP
k . Each time series i
is associated with a Bernoulli process realization, Xi = k fik δθk , that is the
outcome of an infinite coin-flipping sequence based on the BP-determined
coin weights. The set of resulting heads (fik = 1) indicates the set of selected
behaviors, and implicitly defines an infinite-dimensional feature vector fi .
The properties of the BP induce sparsity in the feature space by encouraging sharing of features among the Bernoulli process realizations. Specifically,
the total sum of coin weights is finite, and only certain behaviors have large
coin weights. Thus, certain features are more prevalent, although feature
vectors clearly need not be identical. As such, this model allows infinitely
many possible behaviors, while encouraging a sparse, finite representation
and flexible sharing among time series. The inherent conjugacy of the BP
to the Bernoulli process allows for an analytic predictive distribution for
a feature vector based on the feature vectors observed so far. As outlined
in Section 6.1, this predictive distribution can be described via the Indian
buffet process [Ghahramani, Griffiths and Sollich (2006)] under certain parameterizations of the BP. Computationally, this representation is key.
The beta process—Bernoulli process featural model. The BP is a special
case of a general class of stochastic processes known as completely random
measures [Kingman (1967)]. A completely random measure B is defined such
that for any disjoint sets A1 and A2 (of some sigma algebra A on a measurable space Θ), the corresponding random variables B(A1 ) and B(A2 ) are
independent. This idea generalizes the family of independent increments processes on the real line. All completely random measures can be constructed
from realizations of a nonhomogenous Poisson process [up to a deterministic
component; see Kingman (1967)]. Specifically, a Poisson rate measure ν is
defined on a product space Θ ⊗ R, and a draw from the specified Poisson
process yields a collection of points {θj , ωj } that can be used to define a
completely random measure:
(5)

B=

∞
X

ωk δθk .

k=1

This construction assumes ν has infinite mass, yielding a countably infinite
collection of points from the Poisson process. Equation (5) shows that completely random measures are discrete. Consider a rate measure defined as
the product of an arbitrary sigma-finite base measure B0 , with total mass
B0 (Θ) = α, and an improper beta distribution on the interval [0, 1]. That is,
on the product space Θ ⊗ [0, 1] we have the following rate measure:
(6)

ν(dω, dθ) = cω −1 (1 − ω)c−1 dω B0 (dθ),

JOINT MODELING OF MULTIPLE TIME SERIES VIA THE BETA PROCESS 9

where c > 0 is referred to as a concentration parameter. The resulting completely random measure is known as the beta process, with draws denoted by
B ∼ BP(c, B0 ). With this construction, the weights ωk of the atoms in B lie
in the interval (0, 1), thus defining our desired feature-inclusion probabilities.
The BP is conjugate to a class of Bernoulli processes [Thibaux and Jordan
(2007)], denoted by BeP(B), which provide our desired feature representation. A realization
Xi |B ∼ BeP(B),

(7)

with B an atomic measure, is a collection of unit-mass atoms on Θ located at
some subset of the atoms in B. In particular, fik ∼ Bernoulli(ωk ) is sampled
independently for each atom θk in B, and then
X
(8)
Xi =
fik δθk .
k

One can visualize this process as walking along the atoms of a discrete measure B and, at each atom θk , flipping a coin with probability of heads given
by ωk . Since the rate measure ν is σ-finite, Campbell’s theorem [Kingman
(1993)] guarantees that for α finite, B has finite expected measure resulting
in a finite set of “heads” (active features) in each Xi .
Computationally, Bernoulli process realizations Xi are often summarized
by an infinite vector of binary indicator variables fi = [fi1 , fi2 , . . .]. Using the
BP measure B to tie together the feature vectors encourages the Xi to share
similar features while still allowing significant variability.
4.2. Feature-constrained transition distributions. We seek a prior for tran(i)
sition distributions π (i) = {πk } defined on an infinite-dimensional state
space, but with positive support restricted to a finite subset specified by
fi . Motivated by the fact that Dirichlet-distributed probability mass functions can be generated via normalized gamma random variables, for each
time series i we define a doubly-infinite collection of random variables:
(9)

(i)

ηjk |γ, κ ∼ Gamma(γ + κδ(j, k), 1).

Here, the Kronecker delta function is defined by δ(j, k) = 0 when j 6= k
and δ(k, k) = 1. The hyperparameters γ, κ govern Markovian state switching probabilities. Using this collection of transition weight variables, denoted
by η (i) , we define time-series-specific, feature-constrained transition distributions:
(10)

(i)
πj

(i)
(i)
[ ηj1
ηj2
=
P

· · · ] ⊙ fi

(i)
k|fik =1 ηjk

,

10

FOX, HUGHES, SUDDERTH AND JORDAN

where ⊙ denotes the element-wise, or Hadamard, vector product. This con(i)
struction defines πj over the full set of positive integers, but assigns positive
mass only at indices k where fik = 1, constraining time series i to only transition among behaviors indicated by its feature vector fi . See Figure 2.
The preceding generative process can be equivalently represented via a
P
(i)
sample π̃j from a finite Dirichlet distribution of dimension Ki = k fik ,
(i)

containing the nonzero entries of πj :
(i)

π̃j |fi , γ, κ ∼ Dir([γ, . . . , γ, γ + κ, γ, . . . , γ]).

(11)

This construction reveals that κ places extra expected mass on the selftransition probability of each state, analogously to the sticky HDP-HMM [Fox
et al. (2011b)]. We also use the representation
(i)

πj |fi , γ, κ ∼ Dir([γ, . . . , γ, γ + κ, γ, . . .] ⊙ fi ),

(12)
(i)

(i)
implying πj = [ πj1
(i)
πjk .

(i)

πj2

· · · ] has only a finite number of nonzero en-

This representation is an abuse of notation since the Dirichlet
tries
distribution is not defined for infinitely many parameters. However, the notation of equation (12) is useful in reminding the reader that the indices of
(i)
π̃j defined by equation (11) are not over 1 to Ki , but rather over the Ki
values of k such that fik = 1. Additionally, this notation is useful for concise
representations of the posterior distribution.
We construct the model using the unnormalized transition weights η (i)
instead of just the proper distributions π (i) so that we may consider adding
or removing states when sampling from the nonparametric posterior. Working with η (i) here simplifies expressions, since we need not worry about the
normalization constraint required with π (i) .
4.3. VAR parameters. To complete the Bayesian model specification,
a conjugate matrix-normal inverse-Wishart (MNIW) prior [cf., West and
Harrison (1997)] is placed on the shared collection of dynamic parameters
θk = {Ak , Σk }. Specifically, this prior is comprised of an inverse Wishart
prior on Σk and (conditionally) a matrix normal prior on Ak :
(13)

Σk |n0 , S0 ∼ IW(n0 , S0 ),
Ak |Σk , M, L ∼ MN (Ak ; M, Σk , L),

with n0 the degrees of freedom, S0 the scale matrix, M the mean dynamic
matrix, and L a matrix that together with Σk defines the covariance of Ak .
This prior defines the base measure B0 up to the total mass parameter α,
which has to be separately assigned (see Section 6.5). The MNIW density
function is provided in the supplemental article [Fox et al. (2014)].

JOINT MODELING OF MULTIPLE TIME SERIES VIA THE BETA PROCESS 11

Fig. 3. Graphical model representation of the BP-AR-HMM. For clarity, the feature-inclusion probabilities, ωk , and VAR parameters, θk , of the beta process base measure
B ∼ BP(c, B0 ) are decoupled. Likewise, the Bernoulli process realizations Xi associated
with each time series are compactly represented in terms of feature vectors fi indexed over
the θk ; here, fik |ωk ∼ Bernoulli(ωk ). See equation (5) and equation (8). The fi are used to
(i)
define feature-constrained transition distributions πj |fi ∼ Dir([γ, . . . , γ, γ + κ, γ, . . .] ⊙ fi ).
(i)
π can also be written in terms of transition weights η (i) , as in equation (10). The state
(i)
(i)
(i) (i)
evolves as zt |zt ∼ π (i) and defines conditionally VAR dynamics for yt as in equazt
tion (4).

5. Model overview. Our beta-process-based featural model couples the
dynamic behaviors exhibited by different time series. We term the resulting
model the BP-autoregressive-HMM (BP-AR-HMM). Figure 3 provides a
graphical model representation. Considering the feature space (i.e., set of
autoregressive parameters) and the temporal dynamics (i.e., set of transition
distributions) as separate dimensions, one can think of the BP-AR-HMM
as a spatio-temporal process comprised of a (continuous) beta process in
space and discrete-time Markovian dynamics in time. The overall model
specification is summarized as follows:
(1) Draw beta process realization B ∼ BP(c, B0 ):
B=

∞
X

ωk θk

where θk = {Ak , Σk }.

k=1

(2) For each sequence i from 1 to N :
(a) Draw feature vector fi |B ∼ BeP(B).
(b) Draw feature-constrained transition distributions
(i)

πj |fi ∼ Dir([. . . , γ + δ(j, k)κ, . . .] ⊙ fi ).
(c) For each time step t from 1 to Ti :
(i)
(i) (i)
(i) Draw state sequence zt |zt−1 ∼ π (i) .
zt−1

(ii) Draw observations

(i) (i)
yt |zt

(i)

∼ N (Az (i) ỹt , Σz (i) ).
t

t

12

FOX, HUGHES, SUDDERTH AND JORDAN

One can also straightforwardly consider conditionally independent emissions
in place of the VAR processes, resulting in a BP-HMM model.
6. MCMC posterior computations. In this section we develop an MCMC
algorithm which aims to produce posterior samples of the discrete indicator variables (binary feature assignments F = {fi } and state sequences z =
{z(i) }) underlying the BP-AR-HMM. We analytically marginalize the continuous emission parameters θ = {Ak , Σk } and transition weights η = {η (i) },
since both have conditionally conjugate priors. This focus on discrete parameters represents a major departure from the samplers developed by Fox
et al. (2009) and Hughes, Fox and Sudderth (2012), which explicitly sampled
continuous parameters and viewed z as auxiliary variables.
Our focus on the discrete latent structure has several benefits. First, fixed
feature assignments F instantiate a set of finite AR-HMMs, so that dynamic
programming can be used to efficiently compute marginal likelihoods. Second, we can tractably compute the joint probability of (F, z, y), which allows meaningful comparison of configurations (F, z) with varying numbers
K+ of active features. Such comparison is not possible when instantiating
θ or η, since these variables have dimension proportional to K+ . Finally,
our novel split-merge and data-driven birth moves both consider adding
new behaviors to the model, and we find that proposals for fixed-dimension
discrete variables are much more likely to be accepted than proposals for
high-dimensional continuous parameters. Split-merge proposals with high
acceptance rates are essential to the experimental successes of our method,
since they allow potentially large changes at each iteration.
At each iteration, we cycle among seven distinct sampler moves:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

(Section 6.4) Sample behavior-specific auxiliary variables: θ, η|F, z.
(Section 6.2) Sample shared features, collapsing state sequences: F|θ, η.
(Section 6.3) Sample each state sequence: z|F, θ, η.
(Section 6.5) Sample BP hyperparameters: α, c|F.
(Section 6.5) Sample HMM transition hyperparameters: γ, κ|F, η.
(Section 6.6) Propose birth/death moves on joint configuration: F, z.
(Section 7) Propose split/merge move on joint configuration: F, z.

Note that some moves instantiate θ, η as auxiliary variables to make computations tractable and block sampling possible. However, we discard these
variables after step 5 and only propagate the core state space (F, z, α, c, γ, κ)
across iterations. Note also that steps 2–3 comprise a block sampling of F, z.
Our MCMC steps are detailed in the remainder of this section, except for
split-merge moves which are discussed in Section 7. Further information for
all moves is also available in the supplemental article [Fox et al. (2014)],
including a summary of the overall MCMC procedure in Algorithm D.1.

JOINT MODELING OF MULTIPLE TIME SERIES VIA THE BETA PROCESS 13

Computational complexity. The most expensive step of our sampler occurs when sampling the entries of F (step 2). Sampling each binary entry
requires one run of the forward–backward algorithm to compute the likeli(i)
hood p(y1 : Ti |fi , η (i) , θ); this dynamic programming routine has complexity
O(Ti Ki2 ), where Ki is the number of active behavior states in sequence i and
Ti is the number of time steps. Computation may be significantly reduced
by caching the results of some previous sampling steps, but this remains the
most costly step. Resampling the N state sequences z (step 3) also requires
an O(Ti Ki2 ) forward–backward routine, but harnesses computations made in
sampling F and is only performed N times rather than N K, where K is the
total number of instantiated features. The birth/death moves (step 6) basically only involve the computational cost of sampling the state sequences.
Split-merge moves (step 7) are slightly more complex, but again primarily
result in repeated resampling of state sequences. Note that although each
iteration is fairly costly, the sophisticated sampling updates developed in
the following sections mean that fewer iterations are needed to achieve reasonable posterior estimates.
Conditioned on the set of instantiated features F and behaviors θ, the
model reduces to a collection of independent, finite AR-HMMs. This structure could be harnessed to distribute computation, and parallelization of
our sampling scheme is a promising area for future research.
6.1. Background: The Indian buffet process. Sampling the features F
requires some prerequisite knowledge. As shown by Thibaux and Jordan
(2007), marginalizing over the latent beta process B in the beta processBernoulli process hierarchy and taking c = 1 induces a predictive distribution
on feature indicators known as the Indian buffet process (IBP) [Ghahramani,
Griffiths and Sollich (2006)].4 The IBP is based on a culinary metaphor in
which customers arrive at an infinitely long buffet line of dishes (features).
The first arriving customer (time series) chooses Poisson(α) dishes. Each
subsequent customer i selects a previously tasted dish k with probability
mk /i proportional to the number of previous customers mk to sample it,
and also samples Poisson(α/i) new dishes.
For a detailed derivation of the IBP from the beta process-Bernoulli process formulation of Section 4.1, see Supplement A of Fox et al. (2014).
6.2. Sampling shared feature assignments. We now consider sampling
each sequence’s binary feature assignment fi . Let F−ik denote the set of all
−i
be the number of behaviors used
feature indicators excluding fik , and K+
−i
features may also be shared by
by all other time series. Some of the K+
4

Allowing any c > 0 induces a two-parameter IBP with a similar construction.

14

FOX, HUGHES, SUDDERTH AND JORDAN

time series i, but those unique to this series are not included. For simplicity,
−i
}. The IBP prior
we assume that these behaviors are indexed by {1, . . . , K+
differentiates between this set of “shared” features that other time series
have already selected and those “unique” to the current sequence and appearing nowhere else. We may safely alter sequence i’s assignments to shared
−i
} without changing the number of behaviors present in
features {1, . . . , K+
F. We give a procedure for sampling these entries below. Sampling unique
features requires adding or deleting features, which we cover in Section 6.6.
(i)
Given observed data y1 : Ti , transition variables η (i) , and emission parameters θ, the feature indicators fik for the ith sequence’s shared features
−i
} have posterior distribution
k ∈ {1, . . . , K+
(14)

(i)

(i)

p(fik |F−ik , y1 : Ti , η (i) , θ) ∝ p(fik |F−ik )p(y1 : Ti |fi , η (i) , θ).

−i
Here, the IBP prior implies that p(fik = 1|F−ik ) = m−i
k /N , where mk denotes the number of sequences other than i possessing k. This exploits the
exchangeability of the IBP [Ghahramani, Griffiths and Sollich (2006)], which
follows from the BP construction [Thibaux and Jordan (2007)].
When sampling binary indicators like fik , Metropolis–Hastings proposals
can mix faster [Frigessi et al. (1993)] and have greater efficiency [Liu (1996)]
than standard Gibbs samplers. To update fik given F−ik , we thus use equation (14) to evaluate a Metropolis–Hastings proposal which flips fik to the
binary complement f¯ = 1 − f of its current value f :

(15)

fik ∼ ρ(f¯|f )δ(fik , f¯) + (1 − ρ(f¯|f ))δ(fik , f ),
 p(f = f¯|F−ik , y(i) , η (i) , θ

−i , c)
ik
1 : Ti
1 : K+
¯
ρ(f |f ) = min
,1 .
(i)
p(fik = f |F−ik , y1 : Ti , η (i) , θ1 : K −i , c)
+

(i)

To compute likelihoods p(y1 : Ti |fi , η(i) , θ), we combine fi and η (i) to con(i)

struct the transition distributions πj as in equation (10), and marginalize
over the possible latent state sequences by applying a forward–backward
message passing algorithm for AR-HMMs [see Supplement C.2 of Fox et al.
(2014)]. In each sampler iteration, we apply these proposals sequentially to
each entry of the feature matrix F, visiting each entry one at a time and
retaining any accepted proposals to be used as the fixed F−ik for subsequent
proposals.
6.3. Sampling state sequences z. For each sequence i contained in z, we
(i)
block sample z1 : Ti in one coherent move. This is possible because fi defines
a finite AR-HMM for each sequence, enabling dynamic programming with

JOINT MODELING OF MULTIPLE TIME SERIES VIA THE BETA PROCESS 15
(i)

auxiliary variables π (i) , θ. We compute backward messages mt+1,t (zt ) ∝
(i)
(i) (i)
(i)
p(yt+1 : Ti |zt , ỹt , π (i) , θ), and recursively sample each zt :
(i)

(i)

(i)

(16) zt |zt−1 , y1 : Ti , π (i) , θ ∼ π

(i)

(i)

(i)

(i)

(i)

(i)

zt−1

(zt )N (yt ; Az (i) ỹt , Σz (i) )mt+1,t (zt ).
t

t

Supplement Algorithm D.3 of Fox et al. (2014) explains backward-filtering,
forward-sampling in detail.
6.4. Sampling auxiliary parameters: θ and η. Given fixed features F and
state sequences z, the posterior over auxiliary parameters factorizes neatly:
(17)

p(θ, η|F, z, y) =

K+
Y

(i)

(i)

p(θk |{yt : zt = k})

p(η (i) |z(i) , fi ).

i=1

k=1

We can thus sample each θk and

N
Y

η(i)

independently, as outlined below.

Transition weights η (i) . Given state sequence z(i) and features fi , sequence i’s Markov transition weights η (i) have posterior distribution
(i)

(i)

(18)

(i)

(ηjk )njk +γ+κδ(j,k)−1 e−ηjk
= 1, fik = 1) ∝
,
P
(i) (i)
[ k′ : f ′ =1 ηjk′ ]nj

(i)
p(ηjk |z(i) , fij

ik

P (i)
(i)
(i)
where
counts the transitions from state j to k in z1 : Ti , and nj = k njk
counts all transitions out of state j.
Although the posterior in equation (18) does not belong to any standard parametric family, simulating posterior draws is straightforward. We
use a simple auxiliary variable method which inverts the usual gamma-toDirichlet scaling transformation used to sample Dirichlet random variables.
(i)
We explicitly draw πj , the normalized transition probabilities out of state
j, as
(i)
njk

(19)

(i)

(i)

πj |z(i) ∼ Dir([. . . , γ + njk + κδ(j, k), . . .] ⊙ fi ).
(i)

The unnormalized transition parameters ηj
ministic transformation
(20)

(i)
ηj
(i)

(i) (i)
= Cj π j ,

are then given by the deter-

where
(i)

Cj ∼ Gamma(K+ γ + κ, 1).

P
(i)
Here, K+ = k fik . This sampling process ensures that transition weights
η (i) have magnitude entirely informed by the prior, while only the relative
proportions are influenced by z(i) . Note that this is a correction to the pos(i)
terior for ηj presented in the earlier work of Fox et al. (2009).

16

FOX, HUGHES, SUDDERTH AND JORDAN

Emission parameters θk . The emission parameters θk = {Ak , Σk } for
each feature k have the conjugate matrix normal inverse-Wishart (MNIW)
prior of equation (13). Given z, we form θk ’s MNIW posterior using sufficient statistics from observations assigned to state k across all sequences
(i)
(i)
(i)
(i)
i and time steps t. Letting Yk = {yt : zt = k} and Ỹk = {ỹt : zt = k},
define
X
X
(i) (i)T
(k)
(i) (i)T
(k)
yt ỹt + ML,
Syỹ =
ỹt ỹt + L,
Sỹỹ =
(i)

(i)

(t,i)|zt =k

(t,i)|zt =k

(21)

(k)
Syy
=

X

(i) (i)T

yt yt

+ MLMT ,

(k) −(k) (k)T

(k)

(k)
− Syỹ Sỹỹ Sỹỹ .
Sy|ỹ = Syy

(i)

(t,i)|zt =k

Using standard MNIW conjugacy results, the posterior is then
(k) −(k)

(22)

(k)

Ak |Σk , Yk , Ỹk ∼ MN (Ak ; Syỹ Sỹỹ , Σk , Sỹỹ ),
(k)

Σk |Yk , Ỹk ∼ IW(|Yk | + n0 , Sy|ỹ + S0 ).
Through sharing across multiple time series, we improve inferences about
{Ak , Σk } compared to endowing each sequence with separate behaviors.
6.5. Sampling the BP and transition hyperparameters. We additionally
place priors on the transition hyperparameters γ and κ, as well as the BP
parameters α and c, and infer these via MCMC. Detailed descriptions of
these sampling steps are provided in Supplement G.2 of Fox et al. (2014).
6.6. Data-driven birth–death proposals of unique features. We now consider exploration of the unique features associated with each sequence. One
might consider a birth–death version of a reversible jump proposal [Green
(1995)] that either adds one new feature (“birth”) or eliminates an existing unique feature. This scheme was considered by Fox et al. (2009), where
each proposed new feature k∗ (HMM state) was associated with an emission
(i)
(i)
parameter θk∗ and associated transition parameters {ηjk∗ , ηk∗ j } drawn from
their priors. However, such a sampling procedure can lead to extremely low
acceptance rates in high-dimensional cases since it is unlikely that a random draw of θk∗ will better explain the data than existing, data-informed
parameters. Recall that for a BP-AR-HMM with VAR(1) likelihoods, each
θk = {Ak , Σk } has d2 + d(d + 1)/2 scalar parameters. This issue was addressed by the data-driven proposals of Hughes, Fox and Sudderth (2012),
which used randomly selected windows of data to inform the proposal distribution for θk∗ . Tu and Zhu (2002) employed a related family of data-driven
MCMC proposals for a very different image segmentation model.

JOINT MODELING OF MULTIPLE TIME SERIES VIA THE BETA PROCESS 17

The birth–death frameworks of Fox et al. (2009) and Hughes, Fox and
Sudderth (2012) both perform such moves by marginalizing out the state
sequence z(i) and modifying the continuous HMM parameters θ, η. Our proposed sampler avoids the challenge of constructing effective proposals for θ, η
by collapsing away these high-dimensional parameters and only proposing
modifications to the discrete assignment variables F, z, which are of fixed
(i)
dimension regardless of the dimensionality of the observations yt . Our experiments in Section 9 show the improved mixing of this discrete assignment
approach over previously proposed alternative samplers.
At a high level, our birth–death moves propose changing one binary entry
in fi , combined with a corresponding change to the state sequence z(i) . In
−i
particular, given a sequence i with Ki active features (of which ni = Ki −K+
are unique), we first select the type of move (birth or death). If ni is empty,
we always propose a birth. Otherwise, we propose a birth with probability
1
1
2 and a death of unique feature k with probability 2ni . We denote this
proposal distribution as qf (fi∗ |fi ). Once the feature proposal is selected, we
then propose a new state sequence configuration z∗(i) .
Efficiently drawing a proposed state sequence z∗(i) requires the backwardfiltering, forward-sampling scheme of equation (16). To perform this dynamic
programming we deterministically instantiate the HMM transition weights
and emission parameters as auxiliary variables: η̂, θ̂. These quantities are
deterministic functions of the conditioning set used solely to define the proposal and are not the same as the actual sampled variables used, for example,
in steps 1–5 of the algorithm overview. The variables are discarded before
subsequent sampling stages. Instantiating these variables allows efficient collapsed proposals of discrete indicator configuration (F∗ , z∗ ). To define good
auxiliary variables, we harness the data-driven ideas of Hughes, Fox and
Sudderth (2012). An outline is provided below with a detailed summary
and formal algorithmic presentation in Supplement E of Fox et al. (2014).
Birth proposal for z ∗(i) . During a birth, we create a new state sequence
that can use any features in fi∗ , including the new “birth” feature k∗ . To
construct this proposal, we utilize deterministic auxiliary variables θ̂, η̂ (i) .
(i)
(i)
For existing features k such that fik = 1, we set η̂kj to the prior mean of ηkj
z∗(i)

and θ̂k to the posterior mean of θk given all data in any sequence assigned
to k in the current sample z(i) . For new features k∗ , we can similarly set
(i)
η̂k∗ j to the prior mean. For θ̂k∗ , however, we use a data-driven construction
since using the vague MNIW prior mean would make this feature unlikely
to explain any data at hand.
The resulting data-driven proposal for z(i) is as follows. First, we choose
a random subwindow W of the current sequence i. W contains a contiguous
region of time steps within {1, 2, . . . , Ti }. Second, conditioning on the chosen

18

FOX, HUGHES, SUDDERTH AND JORDAN

window, we set θ̂k∗ to the posterior mean of θk given the data in the window
(i)
{yt : t ∈ W }. Finally, given auxiliary variables θ̂, η̂ (i) for all features, not
just the newborn k∗ , we sample the proposal z∗(i) using the efficient dynamic
programming algorithm for block-sampling state sequences. This sampling
allows any time step in the current sequence to be assigned to the new
feature, not just those in W , and similarly does not force time steps in W to
use the new feature k∗ . These properties maintain reversibility. We denote
this proposal distribution by qz -birth (z∗ |F∗ , z, y).
Death proposal for z ∗(i) . During a death move, we propose a new state
sequence z∗(i) that only uses the reduced set of behaviors in fi∗ . This requires
deterministic auxiliary variables θ̂, η̂(i) constructed as in the birth proposal,
but here only for the features in fi∗ which are all already existing. Again,
using these quantities we construct the proposed z∗(i) via block sampling
and denote the proposal distribution by qz -death (z∗ |F∗ , z, y).
Acceptance ratio. After constructing the proposal, we decide to accept
or reject via the Metropolis–Hastings ratio with probability min(1, ρ), where
for a birth move
(23)

ρbirth-in-seq-i =

p(y, z∗ , fi∗ ) qz -death (z|F, z∗ , y) qf (fi |fi∗ )
.
p(y, z, fi ) qz -birth (z∗ |F∗ , z, y) qf (fi∗ |fi )

Note that evaluating the joint probability p(y, z, fi ) of a new configuration
in the discrete assignment space requires considering the likelihood of all
sequences, rather than just the current one, because under the BP-ARHMM collapsing over θ induces dependencies between all data time steps
assigned to the same feature. This is why we use notation z, even though our
proposals only modify variables associated with sequence i. The sufficient
statistics required for this evaluation are needed for many other parts of
our sampler, so in practice the additional computational cost is negligible
compared to previous birth–death approaches for the BP-AR-HMM.
Finally, we note that we need not account for the random choice of the
window W in the acceptance ratio of this birth–death move. Each possible
W is chosen independently of the current sampler configuration, and each
choice defines a valid transition kernel over a reversible pair of birth–death
moves satisfying detailed balance.
7. Split-merge proposals. The MCMC algorithm presented in Section 6
defines a correct and tractable inference scheme for the BP-AR-HMM, but
the local one-at-a-time sampling of feature assignments can lead to slow
mixing rates. In this section we propose split-merge moves that allow efficient
exploration of large changes in assignments, via simultaneous changes to

JOINT MODELING OF MULTIPLE TIME SERIES VIA THE BETA PROCESS 19

multiple sequences, and can be interleaved with the sampling updates of
Section 6. Additionally, in Section 7.3 we describe how both split-merge
and birth–death moves can be further improved via a modified annealing
procedure that allows fast mixing during sampler burn-in.
7.1. Review: Split-merge for Dirichlet processes. Split-merge MCMC
methods for nonparametric models were first employed by Jain and Neal
(2004) in the context of Dirichlet process (DP) mixture models with conjugate likelihoods. Conjugacy allows samplers to operate directly on discrete
partitions of observations into clusters, marginalizing emission parameters.
Jain and Neal use restricted Gibbs (RG) sampling to create reversible proposals that split a single cluster km into two (ka , kb ) or merge two clusters
into one.
To build an initial split, the RG sampler first assigns items originally in
cluster km at random to either ka or kb . Starting from this partition, the
sampler performs one-at-a-time Gibbs updates, forgetting an item’s current
cluster and reassigning to either ka or kb conditioned on the remaining partitioned data. A proposed new configuration is obtained after several sweeps.
For nonconjugate models, more sophisticated proposals are needed to also
instantiate emission parameters [Jain and Neal (2007)].
Even in small data sets, performing many sweeps for each RG proposal is
often necessary for good performance [Jain and Neal (2004)]. For large data
sets, however, requiring many sweeps for a single proposal is computationally expensive. An alternative method, sequential allocation [Dahl (2005)],
replaces the random initialization of RG. Here, two randomly chosen items
“anchor” the initial assignments of the two new clusters ka , kb . Remaining
items are then sequentially assigned to either ka or kb one at a time, using RG moves conditioning only on previously assigned data. This creates a
proposed partition after only one sampling sweep. Recent work has shown
some success with sequentially allocated split-merge moves for a hierarchical
DP topic model [Wang and Blei (2012)].
Beyond the DP mixture model setting, split-merge MCMC moves are not
well studied. Both Meeds et al. (2006) and Mørup, Schmidt and Hansen
(2011) mention adapting an RG procedure for relational models with latent
features based on the beta process. However, neither work provides details
on constructing proposals, and both lack experimental validation that splitmerge moves improve inference.
7.2. Split-merge MCMC for the BP-AR-HMM. In standard mixture models, such as considered by Jain and Neal (2004), a given data item i is associated with a single cluster ki , so selecting two anchors i and j is equivalent
to selecting two cluster indices ki , kj . However, in feature-based models such

20

FOX, HUGHES, SUDDERTH AND JORDAN

Fig. 4. Illustration of split-merge moves for the BP-AR-HMM, which alter binary feature
matrix F (white indicates present feature) and state sequences z. We show F, z before
( top) and after ( bottom) feature km ( yellow) is split into ka , kb ( red, orange). An item
possessing feature km can have either ka , kb , or both after the split, and its new z sequence
is entirely resampled using any features available in fi . An item without km cannot possess
ka , kb , and its z does not change. Note that a split move can always be reversed by a merge.

as the BP-AR-HMM, each data item i possesses a collection of features indicated by fi . Therefore, our split-merge requires a mechanism not only for
selecting anchors, but also for choosing candidate features to split or merge
from fi , fj . After proposing modified feature vectors, the associated state
sequences must also be updated. Following the motivations for our datadriven birth–death proposals, our split-merge proposals create new feature
matrices F∗ and state sequences z∗ , collapsing away HMM parameters θ, η.
Figure 4 illustrates F and z before and after a split proposal. Motivated by
the efficiencies of sequential allocation [Dahl (2005)], we adopt a sequential
approach. Although a RG approach that samples all variables (F, z, θ, η) is
also possible and relatively straightforward, our experiments [Supplement I
of Fox et al. (2014)] show that our sequential collapsed proposals are vastly
preferred. Intuitively, constructing high acceptance rate proposals for θ, η
can be very difficult since each behavior-specific parameter is high dimensional.
Selecting anchors. Following Dahl (2005), we first select distinct anchor
data items i and j uniformly at random from all time series. The fixed choice
of i, j defines a split-merge transition kernel satisfying detailed balance [Tierney (1994)]. Next, we select from each anchor one feature it possesses, denoted ki , kj , respectively. This choice determines the proposed move: we
merge ki , kj if they are distinct, and split ki = kj into two new features
otherwise.
Selecting ki , kj uniformly at random is problematic. First, in data sets
with many features choosing ki = kj is unlikely, making split moves rare.

JOINT MODELING OF MULTIPLE TIME SERIES VIA THE BETA PROCESS 21

We need to bias the selection process to consider splits more often. Second,
in a reasonably fit model most feature pairs will not make a sensible merge.
Selecting a pair that explains similar data is crucial for efficiency. We thus
develop a proposal distribution which first draws ki uniformly from the
positive entries in fi , and then selects kj given fixed ki as follows:
(24)
(25)

qk (ki , kj |fi , fj ) = Unif(ki |{k : fik = 1})q(kj |ki , fj ),

if k = ki ,
 2Rj fjk ,
q(kj = k|ki , fj ) ∝
m(Yki , Yk )
 fjk
,
otherwise,
m(Yki )m(Yk )

where Yk denotes all observed data in any segment assigned to k (determined by z) and m(·) denotes the marginal likelihood of pooled data observam(Y ,Y )

k
i
tions under the emission distribution. A high value for the ratio m(Yk k)m(Y
k)
i
indicates that the model prefers to explain all data assigned to ki , kj together
rather than use a separate feature for each. This choice biases selection toward promising merge candidates, leading to higher acceptance rates. We
P
m(Yki ,Ykj )
to ensure the probability of a split (when
set Rj = kj 6=ki fjkj m(Yk )m(Y
k )
i

j

possible) is 2/3.
For the VAR likelihood of interest, the marginal likelihood m(Yk ) of all
data assigned to feature k, integrating over parameters θk = {Ak , Σk }, is
m(Yk ) = p(Yk |M, L, S0 , n0 )
ZZ
(26)
=
p(Yk |Ak , Σk )p(Ak |M, Σk , L)p(Σk |n0 , S0 ) dΣk dAk
=

1
(2π)(nk d)/2

·

|L|1/2
Γd ((nk + n0 )/2)
|S0 |n0 /2
· (k)
,
· (k)
Γd (n0 /2)
|Sy|ȳ |(nk +n0 )/2 |Sȳȳ |1/2

where Γd (·) is the d-dimensional multivariate gamma function, | · | denotes
the determinant, nk counts the number of observations in set Yk , and suffi(k)
cient statistics S·,· are defined in equation (21). Further details on this feature selection process are given in Supplement F.1, especially Algorithm F.2,
of Fox et al. (2014).
Once ki , kj are fixed, we construct the candidate state F∗ , z∗ for the proposed move. This construction depends on whether a split or merge occurs,
as detailed below. Recall from Figure 4 that we only alter fℓ , z(ℓ) for data
sequences ℓ which possess either ki or kj . We call this set of items the active
set S. Items not in the active set are unaltered by our proposals.
Split. Our split proposal is defined in Algorithm 1. Iterating through a
∗ ,f∗ }
random permutation of items ℓ in the active set S, we sample {fℓk
ℓkb
a

22

FOX, HUGHES, SUDDERTH AND JORDAN

Algorithm 1 Construction of candidate split configuration (F, z), replacing
feature km with new features ka , kb via sequential allocation
1: fi,[ka ,kb ]

←

[1 0]

z

(i)
(i)

←

ka

(j)

←

kb

t : zt =km

use anchor i to create feature ka
2: fj,[ka ,kb ]

←

[0 1]

z

(j)
t : zt =km

use anchor j to create feature kb
3: θ̂ ← E[θ|y, z] [Algorithm E.4]

set emissions to posterior mean

4: η̂ (ℓ) ← E[η (ℓ) ], ℓ ∈ S [Algorithm E.4] set transitions to prior mean

5: Sprev = {i, j}

initialize set of previously visited items

6: for nonanchor items 
ℓ in random permutation of active set S:

7:

fℓ,[ka kb ]

∼

rithm F.4]

[0 1]



[1 0] ∝ p(fℓ,[ka kb ] |FSprev ,[ka kb ] )p(y(ℓ) |fℓ , θ̂, η̂ (ℓ) )



[1 1]

8:

z(ℓ) ∼ p(z(ℓ) |y(ℓ) , fℓ , θ̂, η̂ (ℓ) ) [Algorithm D.3]

9:

add ℓ to Sprev

add latest sequence to set of visited items

(n)
(n)
ka , kb : θ̂k ← E[θk |{yt : zt

for k =
(
[1 0]
11: fi,[ka kb ] ∼
[1 1]
10:

fj,[ka kb ] ∼

12: z(i) ∼ p(z(i) |y(i) , fi , θ̂, η̂

[Algo-

(i)

)

(

[0 1]
[1 1]

= k, n ∈ Sprev }]

finish by sampling f , z for anchors

z(j) ∼ p(z(j) |y(j) , fj , θ̂, η̂(j) )

Note: Algorithm references found in the supplemental article [Fox et al. (2014)]

from its conditional posterior given previously visited items in S, requiring
that ℓ must possess at least one of the new features ka , kb . We then block
sample its state sequence z∗(ℓ) given fℓ∗ . After sampling all non-anchor sequences in S, we finally sample {fi∗ , z∗(i) } and {fj∗ , z∗(j) } for anchor items
∗ = 1 and f ∗ = 1 so the move remains reversible under a
i, j, enforcing fik
jkb
a
merge. This does not force z∗i to use ka nor z∗j to use kb .
The dynamic programming recursions underlying these proposals use nonrandom auxiliary variables in a similar manner to the data-driven birth–
death proposals. In particular, the HMM transition weights η̂ (ℓ) are set to

JOINT MODELING OF MULTIPLE TIME SERIES VIA THE BETA PROCESS 23

the prior mean of η (ℓ) . The HMM emission parameters θ̂ k are set to the posterior mean of θk given the current data assigned to behavior k in z across
all sequences. For new states k∗ ∈ {ka , kb }, we initialize θ̂ k∗ from the anchor
sequences and then update to account for new data assigned to k∗ after each
item ℓ. As before, η̂, θ̂ are deterministic functions of the conditioning set
used to define the collapsed proposals for F∗ , z∗ ; they are discarded prior to
subsequent sampling stages.
Merge. To merge ka , kb into a new feature km , constructing F∗ is de∗
= 1 for ℓ ∈ S, and 0 otherwise. We thus need only
terministic: we set fℓk
m
∗
to sample zℓ for items in S. We use a block sampler that conditions on
fℓ∗ , θ̂, η̂ (ℓ) , where again θ̂, η̂(ℓ) are auxiliary variables.
Accept–reject. After drawing a candidate configuration (F∗ , z∗ ), the final
step is to compute a Metropolis–Hastings acceptance ratio ρ. Equation (27)
gives the ratio for a split move which creates features ka , kb from km :
(27) ρsplit =

p(y, F∗ , z∗ ) qmerge (F, z|y, F∗ , z∗ , ka , kb ) qk (ka , kb |y, F∗ , z∗ , i, j)
.
p(y, F, z) qsplit (F∗ , z∗ |y, F, z, km ) qk (km , km |y, F, z, i, j)

Recall that our sampler only updates discrete variables F, z and marginalizes
out continuous HMM parameters η, θ. Our split-merge moves are therefore
only tractable with conjugate emission models such as the VAR likelihood
and MNIW prior. Proposals which instantiate emission parameters θ, as in
Jain and Neal (2007), would be required in the nonconjugate case.
For complete split-merge algorithmic details, consult Supplement F of Fox
et al. (2014). In particular, we emphasize that the nonuniform choice of features to split or merge requires some careful accounting, as does the correct
computation of the reverse move probabilities. These issues are discussed in
the supplemental article [Fox et al. (2014)].
7.3. Annealing MCMC proposals. We have presented two novel MCMC
moves for adding or deleting features in the BP-AR-HMM: split-merge and
birth–death moves. Both propose a new discrete variable configuration Ψ∗ =
(F∗ , z∗ ) with either one more or one fewer feature. This proposal is accepted
or rejected with probability min(1, ρ), where ρ has the generic form
(28)

ρ=

p(y, Ψ∗ ) q(Ψ|Ψ∗ , y)
.
p(y, Ψ) q(Ψ∗ |Ψ, y)

This Metropolis–Hastings ratio ρ accounts for improvement in joint probability [via the ratio of p(·) terms] and the requirement of reversibility [via the
ratio of q(·) terms]. We call this latter ratio the Hastings factor. Reversibility
ensures that detailed balance is satisfied, which is a sufficient condition for
convergence to the true posterior distribution.

24

FOX, HUGHES, SUDDERTH AND JORDAN

The reversibility constraint can limit the effectiveness of our proposal
framework. Even when a proposed configuration Ψ∗ results in better joint
probability, its Hastings factor can be small enough to cause rejection. For
example, consider any merge proposal. Reversing this merge requires returning to the original configuration of the feature matrix F via a split proposal.
Ignoring anchor sequence constraints for simplicity, split moves can produce
roughly 3|S| possible feature matrices, since each sequence in the active set
S could have its new features ka , kb set to [0 1], [1 0], or [1 1]. Returning
to the exact original feature matrix out of the many possibilities can be
very unlikely. Even though our proposals use data wisely, the vast space of
possible split configurations means the Hastings factor will always be biased
toward rejection of a merge move.
As a remedy, we recommend annealing the Hastings factor in the acceptance ratio of both split-merge and data-driven birth–death moves. That is,
we use a modified acceptance ratio


p(y, Ψ∗ ) q(Ψ|Ψ∗ , y) 1/Ts
(29)
,
ρ=
p(y, Ψ) q(Ψ∗ |Ψ, y)
where Ts indicates the “temperature” at iteration s. We start with a temperature that is very large, so that T1s ≈ 0 and the Hastings factor is ignored.
The resulting greedy stochastic search allows rapid improvement from the
initial configuration. Over many iterations, we gradually decrease the temperature toward 1. After a specified number of iterations we fix T1s = 1, so
that the Hastings factor is fully represented and the sampler is reversible.
In practice, we use an annealing schedule that linearly interpolates T1s between 0 and 1 over the first several thousand iterations. Our experiments in
Section 9 demonstrate improvement in mixing rates based on this annealing.
8. Related work. Defining the number of dynamic regimes presents a
challenging problem in deploying Markov switching processes such as the
AR-HMM. Previously, Bayesian nonparametric approaches building on the
hierarchical Dirichlet process (HDP) [Teh et al. (2006)] have been proposed
to allow uncertainty in the number of regimes by defining Markov switching
processes on infinite state spaces [Beal, Ghahramani and Rasmussen (2001),
Teh et al. (2006), Fox et al. (2011a, 2011b)]. See Fox et al. (2010) for a
recent review. However, these formulations focus on a single time series,
whereas in this paper our motivation is analyzing multiple time series. A
naı̈ve approach to this setting is to simply couple all time series under a
shared HDP prior. However, this approach assumes that the state spaces
of the multiple Markov switching processes are exactly shared, as are the
transitions among these states. As demonstrated in Section 9 as well as our
extensive toy data experiments in Supplement H of Fox et al. (2014), such

JOINT MODELING OF MULTIPLE TIME SERIES VIA THE BETA PROCESS 25

strict sharing can limit the ability to discover unique dynamic behaviors and
reduces predictive performance.
In recent independent work, Saria, Koller and Penn (2010) developed an
alternative model for multiple time series via the HDP-HMM. Their time
series topic model (TSTM) describes coarse-scale temporal behavior using a
finite set of “topics,” which are themselves distributions on a common set of
autoregressive dynamical models. Each time series is assumed to exhibit all
topics to some extent, but with unique frequencies and temporal patterns.
Alternatively, the mixed HMM [Altman (2007)] uses generalized linear models to allow the state transition and emission distributions of a finite HMM
to depend on arbitrary external covariates. In experiments, this is used to
model the differing temporal dynamics of a small set of known time series
classes.
More broadly, the problem we address here has received little previous
attention, perhaps due to the difficulty of treating combinatorial relationships with parametric models. There are a wide variety of models which
capture correlations among multiple aligned, interacting univariate time series, for example, using Gaussian state space models [Aoki and Havenner
(1991)]. Other approaches cluster time series using a parametric mixture
model [Alon et al. (2003)], or a Dirichlet process mixture [Qi, Paisley and
Carin (2007)], and model the dynamics within each cluster via independent
finite HMMs.
Dynamic Bayesian networks [Murphy (2002)], such as the factorial HMM
[Ghahramani and Jordan (1997)], define a structured representation for the
latent states underlying a single time series. Factorial models are widely used
in applied time series analysis [Lehrach and Husmeier (2009), Duh (2005)].
The infinite factorial HMM [Van Gael, Teh and Ghahramani (2009)] uses the
IBP to model a single time series via an infinite set of latent features, each
evolving according to independent Markovian dynamics. Our work instead
focuses on discovering behaviors shared across multiple time series.
Other approaches do not explicitly model latent temporal dynamics and
instead aim to align time series with consistent global structure [Aach and
Church (2001)]. Motivated by the problem of detecting temporal anomalies,
Listgarten et al. (2006) describe a hierarchical Bayesian approach to modeling shared structure among a known set of time series classes. Independent
HMMs are used to encode nonlinear alignments of observed signal traces
to latent reference time series, but their states do not represent dynamic
behaviors and are not shared among time series.
9. Motion capture experiments. The linear dynamical system is a common model for describing simple human motion [Hsu, Pulli and Popović
(2005)], and the switching linear dynamical system (SLDS) has been successfully applied to the problem of human motion synthesis, classification,

26

FOX, HUGHES, SUDDERTH AND JORDAN

and visual tracking [Pavlović et al. (1999), Pavlović, Rehg and MacCormick
(2000)]. Other approaches develop nonlinear dynamical models using Gaussian processes [Wang, Fleet and Hertzmann (2008)] or are based on a collection of binary latent features [Taylor, Hinton and Roweis (2006)]. However,
there has been little effort in jointly segmenting and identifying common dynamic behaviors among a set of multiple motion capture (MoCap) recordings
of people performing various tasks. The ability to accurately label frames
of a large set of movies is useful for tasks such as querying an extensive
database without relying on expensive manual labeling.
The BP-AR-HMM provides a natural way to model complex MoCap data,
since it does not require manually specifying the set of possible behaviors.
In this section, we apply this model to sequences from the well-known CMU
MoCap database [CMU (2009)]. Using the smaller 6-sequence data set from
Figure 1, we first justify our proposed MCMC algorithm’s benefits over prior
methods for inference, and also show improved performance in segmenting
these sequences relative to alternative parametric models. We then perform
an exploratory analysis of a larger 124-sequence MoCap data set.
9.1. Data preprocessing and hyperparameter selection. As described in
Section 2, we examine multivariate time series generated by 12 MoCap sensors. The CMU data are recorded at a rate of 120 frames per second, and
as a preprocessing step we block-average and downsample the data using a
window size of 12. We additionally scale each component of the observation
vector so that the empirical variance of the set of first-difference measurements, between observations at neighboring time steps, is equal to one.
We fix the hyperparameters of the MNIW prior on θk in an empirical
Bayesian fashion using statistics derived from the sample covariance of the
observed data. These settings are similar to prior work [Hughes, Fox and
Sudderth (2012)] and are detailed in Supplement J of Fox et al. (2014).
The IBP hyperparameters α, c and the transition hyperparameters γ, κ are
sampled at every iteration [see Supplement G of Fox et al. (2014), which
also discusses hyperprior settings].
9.2. Comparison of BP-AR-HMM sampler methods. Before comparing
our BP-AR-HMM to alternative modeling techniques, we first explore the
effectiveness of several possible MCMC methods for the BP-AR-HMM. As
baselines, we implement several previous methods that use reversible jump
procedures and propose moves in the space of continuous HMM parameters. These include proposals for θk from the prior [Fox et al. (2009), “Prior
Rev. Jump”], and split-merge moves interleaved with data-driven proposals
for θk [Hughes, Fox and Sudderth (2012), “SM + cDD”]. The birth–death
moves for these previous approaches act on the continuous HMM parameters, as detailed in Supplement E of Fox et al. (2014). We compare these to

JOINT MODELING OF MULTIPLE TIME SERIES VIA THE BETA PROCESS 27

Fig. 5. Analysis of six MoCap sequences, comparing sampling methods. Baselines are
reversible jump proposals from the prior [Fox et al. (2009)], and split-merge moves interleaved with data-driven proposals of continuous parameters (SM + cDD) [Hughes, Fox and
Sudderth (2012)]. The proposed sampler interleaves split-merge and data-driven discrete
variable proposals (SM + zDD), with and without annealing. Top row: Log-probability and
Hamming distance for 25 runs of each method over 10 hours. Bottom row: Estimated
state sequence z for three fragments from distinct sequences that humans label “arm circles” ( left) or “jogging” ( right). Each recovered feature is depicted by one unique color and
letter. We compare segmentations induced by the most probable samples from the annealed
SM + zDD ( top) and Prior Rev. Jump ( bottom) methods. The latter creates extraneous
features.

our proposed split-merge and birth–death moves on the discrete assignment
variables from Section 6.6 (“SM + zDD”). Finally, we consider annealing the
SM + zDD moves (Section 7.3).
We run 25 chains of each method for 10 hours, which allows at least
10,000 iterations for each individual run. All split-merge methods utilize a
parsimonious initialization starting from just a single feature shared by all
sequences. The Prior Rev. Jump algorithm rarely creates meaningful new
features from this simple initialization, so instead we initialize with five
unique features per sequence as recommended in Fox et al. (2009). The results are summarized in Figure 5. We plot traces of the joint log probability
of data and sampled variables, p(y, F, z, α, c, γ, κ), versus elapsed wall-clock
time. By collapsing out the continuous HMM parameters θ, η, the marginalized form allows direct comparison of configurations despite possible differences in the number of instantiated features [see Supplement C of Fox et al.
(2014) for computation details]. We also plot the temporal evolution of the
normalized Hamming distance between the sampled segmentation z and the
human-provided ground truth annotation, using the optimal alignment of
each “true” state to a sampled feature. Normalized Hamming distance measures the fraction of time steps where the labels of the ground-truth and
estimated segmentations disagree. To compute the optimal (smallest Ham-

28

FOX, HUGHES, SUDDERTH AND JORDAN

ming distance) alignment of estimated and true states, we use the Hungarian
algorithm.
With respect to both the log-probability and Hamming distance metrics,
we find that our SM + zDD inference algorithm with annealing yields the
best results. Most SM + zDD runs using annealing (blue curves) converge
to regions of good segmentations (in terms of Hamming distance) in under two hours, while no run of the Prior Rev. Jump proposals (teal curves)
comes close after ten hours. This indicates the substantial benefit of using a
data-driven proposal for adding new features efficiently. We also find that on
average our new annealing approach (blue) improves on the speed of convergence compared to the nonannealed SM + zDD runs (green). This indicates
that the Hastings factor penalty discussed in Section 7.3 is preventing some
proposals from escaping local optima. Our annealing approach offers a practical workaround to overcome this issue, while still providing valid samples
from the posterior after burn-in.
Our split-merge and data-driven moves are critical for effectively creating
and deleting features to produce quality segmentations. In the lower half of
Figure 5, we show sampled segmentations z for fragments of the time series
from distinct sequences that our human annotation labeled “arm-circle” or
“jogging.” SM + zDD with annealing successfully explains each action with
one primary state reused across all subjects. In contrast, the best Prior Rev.
Jump run (in terms of joint probability) yields a poor segmentation that
assigns multiple unique states for one common action, resulting in lower
probability and much larger Hamming distance. This over-segmentation is
due to the 5-unique-features-per-sequence initialization used for the Prior
Rev. Jump proposal, but we found that a split-merge sampler using the
same initialization could effectively merge the redundant states. Our merge
proposals are thus effective at making global changes to remove redundant
features; such changes are extremely unlikely to occur via the local moves of
standard samplers. Overall, we find that our data-driven birth–death moves
(zDD) allow rapid creation of crucial new states, while the split-merge moves
(SM) enable global improvements to the overall configuration.
Even our best segmentations have nearly 20% normalized Hamming distance error. To disentangle issues of model mismatch from mixing rates, we
investigated whether the same SM + zDD sampler initialized to the true
human segmentations would retain all ground-truth labeled exercise behaviors after many iterations. (Of course, such checks are only possible when
ground-truth labels are available.) We find that these runs prefer to delete
some true unique features, consistently replacing “K: side-bend” with “F:
twist.” Manual inspection reveals that adding missing unique features back
into the model actually decreases the joint probability, meaning the true
segmentation is not quite a global (or even local) mode for the BP-ARHMM. Furthermore, the result of these runs after burn-in yield similar joint

JOINT MODELING OF MULTIPLE TIME SERIES VIA THE BETA PROCESS 29

Fig. 6. Comparison of the BP-AR-HMM analysis using SM + zDD inference (Figure 5)
to parametric HMM and Gaussian mixture model (GMM) approaches. Left: Hamming
distance versus number of GMM clusters/HMM states on raw observations and first-difference observations, with the BP-AR-HMM segmentation and true feature count K = 12
( magenta, vertical dashed) shown for comparison. Right: Feature matrices associated with
(a) the human annotation, (b) BP-AR-HMM averaged across MCMC samples, and maximum-likelihood assignment of the (c) GMM and (d) HMM using first-difference observations and 12 states. We set feature k present in sequence i only if z(i) is assigned to k for
at least 2% of its time steps. White indicates a feature being present.

log-probability to the best run of our SM + zDD sampler initialized to just
one feature. We therefore conclude that our inference procedure is reasonably effective and that future work should concentrate on improving the
local dynamical model to better capture the properties of unique human
behaviors.
9.3. Comparison to alternative time series models. We next compare the
BP-AR-HMM to alternative models to assess the suitability of our nonparametric feature-based approach. As alternatives, we consider the Gaussian
mixture model (GMM) method of Barbič et al. (2004).5 We also consider
a GMM on first-difference observations (which behaves like a special case
of our autoregressive model) and an HMM on both first-difference and raw
observations. Note that both the GMM and HMM models are parametric,
requiring the number of states to be specified a priori, and that both methods are trained via expectation maximization (EM) to produce maximum
likelihood parameter estimates.
In Figure 6 we compare all methods’ estimated segmentation accuracy,
measuring Hamming distance between the estimated label sequence z and
5

Barbič et al. (2004) also present an approach based on probabilistic principal component analysis (PCA), but this method focuses primarily on change-point detection rather
than behavior clustering.

30

FOX, HUGHES, SUDDERTH AND JORDAN

human annotation on the six MoCap sequences. The GMM and HMM results
show the most likely of 25 initializations of EM using the HMM Matlab
toolbox [Murphy (1998)]. Our BP-AR-HMM Hamming distance comes from
the best single MCMC sample (in log probability) among all runs of SM +
zDD with annealing in Figure 5. The BP-AR-HMM provides more accurate
segmentations than the GMM and HMM, and this remains true regardless
of the number of states set for these parametric alternatives.
The BP-AR-HMM’s accuracy is due to better recovery of the sparse behavior sharing exhibited in the data. This is shown in Figure 6, where we
compare estimated binary feature matrices for all methods. In contrast to the
sequence-specific variability modeled by the BP-AR-HMM, both the GMM
and HMM assume that each sequence uses all possible behaviors, which results in the strong vertical bands of white in almost all columns. Overall, the
BP-AR-HMM produces superior results due to its flexible feature sharing
and allowance for unique behaviors.
9.4. Exploring a large motion capture data set. Finally, we consider a
larger motion capture data set of 124 sequences, all “Physical Activities &
Sports” examples from the CMU MoCap data set (including all sequences in
our earlier small data set). The median length is T = 95.5 times steps (minimum 16, maximum 1484). Human-produced segmentations for ground-truth
comparison are not available for data of this scale. Furthermore, analyzing
this data is computationally infeasible without split-merge and data-driven
birth–death moves. For example, the small data set required a special “5
unique features per sequence” initialization to perform well with Prior Rev.
Jump proposals, but using this initialization here would create over 600 features, requiring a prohibitively long sampling run to merge related behaviors.
In contrast, our full MCMC sampler (SM-zDD with annealing) completed
2000 iterations in 24 hours. Starting from just one feature shared by all 124
sequences, our SM + zDD moves identify a diverse set of 33 behaviors in
this data set. A set of 16 representative behaviors are shown in Figure 7.
The resulting clusterings of time series segments represent coherent dynamic
behaviors. Note that a full quantitative analysis of the segmentations produced on this data set is not possible because we lack manual annotations.
Instead, here we simply illustrate that our improved inference procedure
robustly explores the posterior, enabling this large-scale analysis and producing promising results.
10. Discussion. We have presented a Bayesian nonparametric framework
for discovering dynamical behaviors common to multiple time series. Our
formulation reposes on the beta process, which provides a prior distribution
on overlapping subsets of binary features. This prior allows both for commonality and series-specific variability in the use of dynamic behaviors. We

JOINT MODELING OF MULTIPLE TIME SERIES VIA THE BETA PROCESS 31

Fig. 7. Analysis of 124 MoCap sequences by interleaving of split-merge and data-driven
MCMC moves. 16 exemplars of the 33 recovered behaviors are displayed, with text label
applied post-hoc to aid human interpretation. Skeleton trajectories were visualized from
contiguous segments of at least 1 second of data as segmented by the sampled state sequence
z(i) . Boxes group segments from distinct sequences assigned to the same behavior type.

additionally developed an exact sampling algorithm for the BP-AR-HMM
model, as well as novel split-merge moves and data-driven birth moves which
efficiently explore the unbounded feature space. The utility of our BP-ARHMM was demonstrated on the task of segmenting a large set of MoCap
sequences. Although we focused on switching VAR processes, our approach
(and sampling algorithms) could also be applied to other Markov switching
processes, such as switching linear dynamical systems.
The idea proposed herein of a feature-based approach to relating multiple
time series is not limited to nonparametric modeling. One could just as easily
employ these ideas within a parametric model that prespecifies the number
of possible dynamic behaviors. We emphasize, however, that conditioned on
the infinite feature vectors of our BP-AR-HMM, which are guaranteed to
be sparse, our model reduces to a collection of Markov switching processes
on a finite state space. The beta process simply allows for flexibility in the
overall number of globally shared behaviors, and computationally we do not
rely on any truncations of this infinite model.
One area of future work is further improving the split-merge proposals.
Despite the clear benefits of these proposals, we found sometimes that one

32

FOX, HUGHES, SUDDERTH AND JORDAN

“true” state would be split among several recovered features. The root of
the splitting issue is twofold. One is the issue of mixing, which the annealing partially addresses, however, the fundamental issue of maintaining the
reversibility of split-merge moves limits the acceptance rates due to the combinatorial number of configurations. The second is due to modeling issues.
Our model assumes that the dynamic behavior parameters (i.e., VAR parameters) are identical between time series and do not change over time.
This assumption can be problematic in grouping related dynamic behaviors
and might be addressed via hierarchical models of behaviors or by ideas similar to those of the dependent Dirchlet process [MacEachern (1999), Griffin
and Steel (2006)] that allows for time-varying parameters.
Overall, the MoCap results appeared to be fairly robust to examples of
only slightly dissimilar behaviors, such as squatting to different levels or
twisting at different rates. However, in cases such as the running motion
where only portions of the body moved in the same way while others did
not, the behaviors can be split (e.g., third jogging example in Figure 5). This
observation could motivate local partition processes [Dunson (2009, 2010)]
rather than global partition processes. That is, our current model assumes
that the grouping of observations into behavior categories occurs along all
components of the observation vector rather than just a portion (e.g., lower
body measurements). Allowing for greater flexibility in the grouping of observations becomes increasingly important in high dimensions.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Details on prior specification, derivation of MCMC sampler, and further
experimental results (DOI: 10.1214/14-AOAS742SUPP; .pdf). We provide
additional background material on our prior specification, including the beta
process, Indian buffet process, and inverse Wishart and matrix normal distributions. We also detail aspects of our MCMC sampler, with further information on the birth–death and split-merge proposals. Finally, we include
synthetic data experiments and details on the settings used for our MoCap
experiments.
REFERENCES
Aach, J. and Church, G. (2001). Aligning gene expression time series with time warping
algorithms. Bioinformatics 17 495–508.
Alon, J., Sclaroff, S., Kollios, G. and Pavlovic, V. (2003). Discovering clusters
in motion time-series data. In Proc. of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR). Madison, WI, USA.
Altman, R. M. (2007). Mixed hidden Markov models: An extension of the hidden
Markov model to the longitudinal data setting. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 102 201–210.
MR2345538

JOINT MODELING OF MULTIPLE TIME SERIES VIA THE BETA PROCESS 33
Aoki, M. and Havenner, A. (1991). State space modeling of multiple time series. Econometric Rev. 10 1–99. MR1108250
Barbič, J., Safonova, A., Pan, J.-Y., Faloutsos, C., Hodgins, J. K. and Pollard, N. S. (2004). Segmenting motion capture data into distinct behaviors. In Proc.
of Graphics Interface. London, Ontario, Canada.
Beal, M., Ghahramani, Z. and Rasmussen, C. (2001). The infinite hidden Markov
model. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) 14. Vancouver,
Canada.
CMU (2009). Carnegie Mellon University graphics lab motion capture database. Available
at http://mocap.cs.cmu.edu/.
Dahl, D. B. (2005). Sequentially-allocated merge-split sampler for conjugate and nonconjugate dirichlet process mixture models. Technical report, Texas A&M Univ., College
Station, TX.
Duh, K. (2005). Jointly labeling multiple sequences: A factorial HMM approach. In 43rd
Annual Meeting of the Assoc. for Computational Linguistics (ACL). Ann Arbor, MI.
Dunson, D. B. (2009). Nonparametric Bayes local partition models for random effects.
Biometrika 96 249–262. MR2507141
Dunson, D. B. (2010). Multivariate kernel partition process mixtures. Statist. Sinica 20
1395–1422. MR2777330
Fox, E. B., Sudderth, E. B., Jordan, M. I. and Willsky, A. S. (2009). Sharing features among dynamical systems with beta processes. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NIPS) 22. Vancouver, Canada.
Fox, E. B., Sudderth, E. B., Jordan, M. I. and Willsky, A. S. (2010). Bayesian
nonparametric methods for learning Markov switching processes. IEEE Signal Process.
Mag. 27 43–54.
Fox, E. B., Sudderth, E. B., Jordan, M. I. and Willsky, A. S. (2011a). Bayesian nonparametric inference of switching dynamic linear models. IEEE Trans. Signal Process.
59 1569–1585.
Fox, E. B., Sudderth, E. B., Jordan, M. I. and Willsky, A. S. (2011b). A sticky
HDP–HMM with application to speaker diarization. Ann. Appl. Stat. 5 1020–1056.
MR2840185
Fox, E. B., Hughes, M. C., Sudderth, E. B. and Jordan, M. I. (2014). Supplement to
“Joint modeling of multiple time series via the beta process with application to motion
capture segmentation.” DOI:10.1214/14-AOAS742SUPP.
Frigessi, A., di Stefano, P., Hwang, C.-R. and Sheu, S. J. (1993). Convergence rates
of the Gibbs sampler, the Metropolis algorithm and other single-site updating dynamics.
J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 55 205–219. MR1210432
Ghahramani, Z., Griffiths, T. L. and Sollich, P. (2006). Bayesian nonparametric latent feature models. In Proc. of the Eighth Valencia International Meeting on Bayesian
Statistics (Bayesian Statistics 8). Alicante, Spain.
Ghahramani, Z. and Jordan, M. I. (1997). Factorial hidden Markov models. Machine
Learning 29 245–273.
Green, P. J. (1995). Reversible jump Markov chain Monte Carlo computation and
Bayesian model determination. Biometrika 82 711–732. MR1380810
Griffin, J. E. and Steel, M. F. J. (2006). Order-based dependent Dirichlet processes.
J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 101 179–194. MR2268037
Hjort, N. L. (1990). Nonparametric Bayes estimators based on beta processes in models
for life history data. Ann. Statist. 18 1259–1294. MR1062708

34

FOX, HUGHES, SUDDERTH AND JORDAN

Hsu, E., Pulli, K. and Popović, J. (2005). Style translation for human motion. In Proc.
of the 32nd International Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Technologies (SIGGRAPH). Los Angeles, CA.
Hughes, M., Fox, E. B. and Sudderth, E. B. (2012). Effective split merge Monte
Carlo methods for nonparametric models of sequential data. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS) 25. Lake Tahoe, NV, USA.
Jain, S. and Neal, R. M. (2004). A split-merge Markov chain Monte Carlo procedure for the Dirichlet process mixture model. J. Comput. Graph. Statist. 13 158–182.
MR2044876
Jain, S. and Neal, R. M. (2007). Splitting and merging components of a nonconjugate
Dirichlet process mixture model. Bayesian Anal. 2 445–472. MR2342168
Kingman, J. F. C. (1967). Completely random measures. Pacific J. Math. 21 59–78.
MR0210185
Kingman, J. F. C. (1993). Poisson Processes. Oxford Univ. Press, New York. MR1207584
Lehrach, W. P. and Husmeier, D. (2009). Segmenting bacterial and viral DNA sequence
alignments with a trans-dimensional phylogenetic factorial hidden Markov model. J. R.
Stat. Soc. Ser. C. Appl. Stat. 58 307–327. MR2750008
Listgarten, J., Neal, R., Roweis, S., Puckrin, R. and Cutler, S. (2006). Bayesian
detection of infrequent differences in sets of time series with shared structure. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) 19. Vancouver, Canada.
Liu, J. S. (1996). Peskun’s theorem and a modified discrete-state Gibbs sampler.
Biometrika 83 681–682. MR1423883
MacEachern, S. N. (1999). Dependent nonparametric processes. In ASA Proc. of the
Section on Bayesian Statistical Science. Amer. Statist. Assoc., Alexandria, VA.
Meeds, E., Ghahramani, Z., Neal, R. M. and Roweis, S. T. (2006). Modeling dyadic
data with binary latent factors. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS) 19. Vancouver, Canada.
Mørup, M., Schmidt, M. N. and Hansen, L. K. (2011). Infinite multiple membership
relational modeling for complex networks. In IEEE International Workshop on Machine
Learning for Signal Processing. Beijing, China.
Murphy, K. P. (1998). Hidden Markov model (HMM) toolbox for MATLAB. Available
at http://www.cs.ubc.ca/ murphyk/Software/HMM/hmm.html.
Murphy, K. P. (2002). Dynamic Bayesian networks: Representation, inference and learning. Ph.D. thesis, Univ. California, Berkeley. MR2704368
Pavlović, V., Rehg, J. M. and MacCormick, J. (2000). Learning switching linear models of human motion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS)
13. Vancouver, Canada.
Pavlović, V., Rehg, J. M., Cham, T. J. and Murphy, K. P. (1999). A dynamic
Bayesian network approach to figure tracking using learned dynamic models. In Proc. of
the 7th IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). Kerkyra, Greece.
Qi, Y., Paisley, J. W. and Carin, L. (2007). Music analysis using hidden Markov
mixture models. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 55 5209–5224. MR2469377
Rabiner, L. R. (1989). A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications in
speech recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE 77 257–286.
Saria, S., Koller, D. and Penn, A. (2010). Discovering shared and individual latent
structure in multiple time series. Available at arXiv:1008.2028.
Taylor, G. W., Hinton, G. E. and Roweis, S. T. (2006). Modeling human motion
using binary latent variables. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS) 19. Vancouver, Canada.

JOINT MODELING OF MULTIPLE TIME SERIES VIA THE BETA PROCESS 35
Teh, Y. W., Jordan, M. I., Beal, M. J. and Blei, D. M. (2006). Hierarchical Dirichlet
processes. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 101 1566–1581. MR2279480
Thibaux, R. and Jordan, M. I. (2007). Hierarchical beta processes and the Indian buffet
process. In Proc. of the Eleventh International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Statistics (AISTATS). San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Tierney, L. (1994). Markov chains for exploring posterior distributions. Ann. Statist. 22
1701–1762. MR1329166
Tu, Z. and Zhu, S. C. (2002). Image segmentation by data-driven Markov chain Monte
Carlo. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 24 657–673.
Van Gael, J., Teh, Y. W. and Ghahramani, Z. (2009). The infinite factorial hidden Markov model. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) 21.
Vancouver, Canada.
Wang, C. and Blei, D. (2012). A split-merge MCMC algorithm for the hierarchical
Dirichlet process. Available at arXiv:1201.1657.
Wang, J. M., Fleet, D. J. and Hertzmann, A. (2008). Gaussian process dynamical
models for human motion. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 30 283–298.
West, M. and Harrison, J. (1997). Bayesian Forecasting and Dynamic Models, 2nd ed.
Springer, New York. MR1482232
E. B. Fox
Department of Statistics
University of Washington
Box 354322
Seattle, Washington 98195
USA
E-mail: ebfox@stat.washington.edu

M. C. Hughes
E. B. Sudderth
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
115 Waterman St., Box 1910
Providence, Rhode Island 02912
USA
E-mail: mhughes@cs.brown.edu
sudderth@cs.brown.edu

M. I. Jordan
Department of Statistics
and Department of EECS
University of California, Berkeley
427 Evans Hall
Berkeley, California 94720
USA
E-mail: jordan@stat.berkeley.edu

