Learning is planning: near Bayes-optimal reinforcement learning
via Monte-Carlo tree search

John Asmuth
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854

Abstract
Bayes-optimal behavior, while well-defined, is
often difficult to achieve. Recent advances in
the use of Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) have
shown that it is possible to act near-optimally in
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) with very
large or infinite state spaces. Bayes-optimal behavior in an unknown MDP is equivalent to optimal behavior in the known belief-space MDP,
although the size of this belief-space MDP grows
exponentially with the amount of history retained, and is potentially infinite. We show how
an agent can use one particular MCTS algorithm,
Forward Search Sparse Sampling (FSSS), in an
efficient way to act nearly Bayes-optimally for
all but a polynomial number of steps, assuming
that FSSS can be used to act efficiently in any
possible underlying MDP.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), a central issue is the exploration/exploitation tradeoff (Sutton & Barto, 1998). Simply
put, this dilemma refers to the balance between acting optimally according to the information that you have (exploitation) and acting potentially sub-optimally so as to improve
the quality of your information (exploration).
The classical approach to this issue considers the “general”
model, and makes its guarantees (if any exist) about an
algorithm’s behavior on any possible model that satisfies
some constraints. A maximum likelihood estimate (MLE)
is used with a promise that, if the correct exploration steps
are taken, the resulting model is close to the truth.
This frequentist approach to optimal behavior is effective in
many scenarios, and has the added benefit that the MLE is
often easy to compute. However, providing guarantees for
a “general” MDP can cause over-exploration beyond what
is needed to ensure optimal or near-optimal behavior.

Michael Littman
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854

An effective approach to limiting over-exploration is to
constrain the model to a class that is easier to learn. For example, if we know that the model dynamics can be treated
as a separate problem for any one of a number of state
features, we can more efficiently do factor learning (Strehl
et al., 2007). Or, if we know that certain groups of states
have identical dynamics, we can learn the group dynamics
by using relocatable action models (Leffler et al., 2007).
The downside to this strategy is that, in most cases, an entirely new algorithm must be invented to take advantage of
new constraints.
The Bayesian approach to model estimation in RL (Wilson
et al., 2007) introduces the use of model priors, and much
of the innovation required moves from algorithm design to
prior engineering and inference. While neither of these new
issues are trivial, they extend beyond reinforcement learning and general Bayesian techniques from outside of the
field will apply, broadening the palette of possible techniques that can be brought to bear.
One effect of introducing Bayesian ideas to reinforcement learning is the concept of Bayes-optimal behavior, which chooses actions that maximize expected reward as a function of belief-state.
If an agent
achieves Bayes-optimal behavior, it circumvents the exploration/exploitation dilemma; information gathering options
are built into the definition. As a result, two major aspects
of an RL algorithm, learning and planning, are unified and
become simply planning.
Unfortunately, the general problem of computing Bayesoptimal behavior is intractable. Near Bayes-optimal behavior, where an agent is approximately Bayes-optimal for all
but a small number of steps, has been achieved for Dirichlet priors (Kolter & Ng, 2009) and some more general priors (Sorg et al., 2010).
We will show how an existing planning algorithm, FSSS,
can be modified to achieve near Bayes-optimal behavior for
a very general class of models and model priors.

2

Background

Reinforcement learning is a framework for sequential
decision-making problems where the dynamics of the environment are not known in advance. In RL, an agent is
supplied with an observation, to which it responds with an
action. In response to every action taken, the environment
returns a new observation as well as a numerical reward
signal. The agent’s goal is to maximize the total sum of all
rewards over time.
Formally, an environment is described as a Markov Decision Process (Puterman, 1994), or MDP. An MDP is the
tuple M = hS, A, T, R, γi, where S is the set of possible
states, A is the set of available actions, T : S ×A → Π(S)1
is the transition function, R : S × A → Π(<) is the reward
function, and γ is a discount factor.
A policy π : S → A describes what action an agent takes
in a given state. The optimal policy for some MDP M is
defined as follows:
π∗

=

argmax Q(s, a)
a

Q(s, a)
V (s)

= E[R(s, a)] + γEs0 ∼T (s,a) [V (s0 )]
=

max Q(s, a).
a

For any given MDP prior φ(M ), a corresponding beliefMDP mφ can be constructed by considering the set of
all possible histories H, which consists of every finite sequence of steps in the environment. This is also called
a Bayes-adaptive MDP (Duff, 2003). The state space of
the belief-MDP S = S × H pairs “real” states with histories. The action space A remains unchanged. Since
the belief-state includes history, next states in the transition function are constrained to belief-states that extend the
previous belief-state with the last occurring transition and
reward. Because states are completely observable, histories can be summarized by counts of individual state transitions. It is easiest to express the new transition and reward
functions as a single joint distribution T -Rφ (hs, hi, a) =
Π(hs0 , h ∪ (s, a, s0 , r)i, r).
When T -Rφ is constructed in such a way that the
likelihood
P (hs0 , h ∪ (s, a, s0 , r)i, r|hs, hi, a)
=
R
0
P
(s
,
r|s,
a,
M
)φ(M
|h)dM
,
the
optimal
policy
M
in mφ|h corresponds to the Bayes-optimal policy, given
the MDP prior φ (Duff, 2003). In many cases, transition
likelihoods are easy to compute or sample from. For
example, the Flat-Dirichlet-Multinomial (Poupart et al.,
2006), or FDM,
θs,a

∼ Dir(α)

T (s, a) ∼ M ult(θs,a ),
1
Here, we use the notation that Π(X) is the set of probability
distributions over the set X.

holds that the next-state distributions for each state-action
pair are i.i.d. with a Dirichlet prior.
In this case,
P (s0 |s, a, h) ∝ Cs,a (s0 ) + αs0 , where Cs,a (s0 ) is the number of times a transition to s0 has been observed when action a was taken in state s, and αs0 is the element in the
hyperparameter vector α corresponding to s0 . Note that a
contribution of the current paper is to handle general distributions beyond Dirichlet priors.
The obvious intractability problem comes from the size of
the belief-MDP’s state space S, which grows exponentially
with the length of the amount of history to be considered.
Even for a very small MDP, the corresponding belief-MDP
quickly becomes unmanageable. The use of many standard
planning techniques, such as value iteration or policy iteration (Sutton & Barto, 1998; Puterman, 1994), becomes
impossible with an infinite horizon domain.
Exact Bayes-optimal behavior is impossible to compute efficintly for general MDPs and priors (including FDM), so
we must rely upon approximations. Approximate Bayesoptimal behavior, in which the value of each action selected
is within  of the value of the exact Bayes-optimal action,
is easier to achieve than exact Bayes-optimal behavior, but
is still intractable. Near Bayes-optimal behavior, which is
approximately Bayes-optimal for all but a polynomial number of steps, can be efficiently achieved in many situations
and is the focus of our work.

3

Related Work

The approach we propose in this paper has roots in a number of existing algorithms, which we sketch next.
Bayesian Exploration/Exploitation Trade-off in LEarning (Poupart et al., 2006), or BEETLE, is an algorithm that
uses the belief-MDP formulation of Bayesian RL in order
to achieve approximately Bayes-optimal behavior. It uses
the FDM prior and known properties of the value function
to calculate an approximation over all states.
Bayesian Exploration Bonus (Kolter & Ng, 2009), or
BEB, is a near Bayes-optimal algorithm for the FDM
prior and known rewards. It acts greedily according to
the maximum likelihood estimation of the MDP, but uses
the alternate reward function RBEB (s, a) = R(s, a) +
β/(1 + n(s, a)), where β is a domain-dependent constant
and n(s, a) is the number of times action a has been performed in state s. This reward-supplement strategy is also
used in PAC-MDP (Kakade, 2003) approaches (Strehl &
Littman, 2008), and biases an agent toward states in which
it has less experience. The particular bonus used by BEB
will cause the agent to explore enough to be near Bayesoptimal without the over-exploring seen in PAC-MDP algorithms. There are ways to use posterior variance to create reward bonuses for more general Bayesian priors (Sorg
et al., 2010).

Bayesian Dynamic Programming (Strens, 2000), or
Bayesian-DP, and Best Of Sampled Set (Asmuth et al.,
2009), or BOSS, are two examples of Bayesian RL algorithms that can work with a much more flexible prior. They
both use samples from the MDP posterior. Bayesian-DP
will sample an MDP at the beginning of the experiment,
and will resample the model when the current one has been
in use for some threshold number of steps. It acts greedily
according to the most recent sample. BOSS will sample
C models every time a particular state-action pair has been
tried B times, and then combine all C models in such a
way as to have each state’s value be at least as great as
that state’s value in each of the sampled MDPs. Both algorithms rely on uncertainty in the posterior causing variance
in the samples: variance in the samples causes optimistic
value estimates, which in turn drive the agent to visit underexplored parts of the state space.
Sparse Sampling (Kearns et al., 1999) works by recursively expanding a full search tree up to a certain depth
d. At the root, each of the A actions is chosen a constant
number of times C, yielding a set of A · C children. Sparse
sampling is then run on each of the children with a recursion depth one less than the root’s. Once the tree is fully
created, the leaves are each assigned a value of zero. Then,
starting at the leaves, the values are backed up and combined via the Bellman equation, giving the parents’ values,
until the root’s value is determined. The total number of
nodes in this search tree is (AC)d , making the algorithm
impractical to run in all but the most trivial of domains.
It is worth noting, however, that Sparse Sampling is best
known as one of the first RL planning algorithms that
can achieve high accuracy with high probability using an
amount of computation that is not a function of the size
of the state space2 . Because of this attractive property, it
makes sense to select it or one of its variants as the planner
for the infinitely large belief-MDP. Sparse Sampling is the
basis for a number of Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) algorithms, which are considerably faster in practice (Kocsis
& Szepesvári, 2006; Walsh et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2005).
Bayesian Sparse Sampling (Wang et al., 2005) is a modification of Sparse Sampling that applies only in the
Bayesian setting. Instead of a full tree expansion, Bayesian
Sparse Sampling preferentially expands only promising
parts of the tree by performing rollouts, or simulated trajectories, up to the specified depth. On a given rollout, the
action for a particular node’s belief-state is chosen by sampling a model from the posterior and solving this model exactly for the current “real” state. This action-selection strategy is myopic, but the algorithm can still achieve Bayesoptimal behavior in the limit because the method for computing the resulting policy is the same as in Sparse Sampling; it propagates values from the leaves back towards
2

Assuming sampling from the model in constant time

Input: state s, max depth d, #trajectories t, MDP M
Output: estimated value for state s
for t times do
FSSS-Rollout(s, d, 0, M )
V̂ (s) ← maxa Ud (s, a)
return V̂ (s)
Algorithm 1: FSSS(s, d, t, M )

the root. This algorithm is limited by the exact-solve step
within the inner loop, but also works in domains with continuous action spaces, unlike Sparse Sampling.
Upper Confidence bounds on Trees (Kocsis &
Szepesvári, 2006), or UCT, is a recent Monte-Carlo
tree search idea that has gained notice through good
performance in computer Go (Gelly & Silver, 2008). Like
Bayesian Sparse Sampling, UCT preferentially expands
the search tree by performing rollouts. In addition to
the value estimates for each node, which are computed
by running backups backwards along trajectories, UCT
maintains upper confidence bounds using the UCB algorithm (Auer et al., 2002). This algorithm is very aggressive
and typically will under-explore.
Forward Search Sparse Sampling (Walsh et al., 2010), or
FSSS, is the approach we adopt in this paper. It also preferentially expands the search tree through the use of rollouts. It is outlined in Algorithm 1. Unlike either Bayesian
Sparse Sampling or UCT, it retains the attractive guarantees of the original Sparse Sampling algorithm. FSSS
maintains hard upper and lower bounds on the values for
each state and action so as to direct the rollouts; actions are
chosen greedily according to the upper bound on the value,
and the next state is chosen such that it is the most uncertain of the available candidates (according to the difference
in its upper and lower bounds).
FSSS will find the action to take from a given state s0 ,
which will be the root of the search tree. The tree is
expanded by running t trajectories, or rollouts, of length
d. There are theoretically justified ways to choose t
and d, but in practical applications they are knobs used
to balance computational overhead and accuracy. To
run a single rollout, the agent will call Algorithm 2,
FSSS-Rollout(s0 , d, 0, M ). The values Ud (s) and Ld (s)
are the upper and lower bounds on the value of the node
for state s at depth d, respectively. Each time a rollout is
performed, the tree will be expanded. After at most (AC)d
rollouts are finished (but often less in practice), FSSS will
have expanded the tree as much as is possibly useful, and
will agree with the action chosen by Sparse Sampling.

4

Bayesian FSSS

This paper’s contribution, Bayesian FSSS (BFS3) is the
application of FSSS to a belief-MDP and is outlined in Al-

Input: state s, max depth d, current depth l, MDP M
if Terminal(s) then
Ud (s) = Ld (s) = 0
return
if d = l then
return
if ¬Visitedd (s) then
Visitedd (s) ← true
foreach a ∈ A do
Rd (s, a), Countd (s, a, s0 ), Childrend (s, a)
← 0, 0, {}
for C times do
s0 , r ∼ TM (s, a), RM (s, a)
Countd (s, a, s0 ) ← Countd (s, a, s0 ) + 1
Childrend (s, a) ← Childrend (s, a) ∪ {s0 }
Rd (s, a) ← Rd (s, a) + r/C
if ¬Visitedd+1 (s0 ) then
Ud+1 (s0 ), Ld+1 (s0 ) = Vmax , Vmin
Bellman-backup(s, d)
a ← argmaxa Ud (s, a)
s0 ← argmaxs0 (Ud+1 (s0 ) − Ld+1 (s0 )) · Countd (s, a, s0 )
FSSS-Rollout(s0 , d, l + 1, M )
Bellman-backup(s, d)
return
Algorithm 2: FSSS-Rollout(s, d, l, M )

Figure 1: BFS3 samples next-belief-states for each action
C times, and then runs FSSS on the resulting belief state,
using the belief-MDP as a generative model. Every node
the same distance from the root represents one of the possible worlds that the agent may experience, each with a different history and MDP posterior.

sampled from it. Also, note that whenever FSSS does
a Bellman backup, that backup is done for a belief-state
(since FSSS is acting on the belief-MDP).

Input: state s, history h, depth d, #trajectories t, MPD
prior φ
Output: action to take in state s
if hs, hi ∈ solved-belief-states then
return π(hs, hi)
foreach a ∈ A do
for C times do
hs0 , h0 i, r ∼ T -Rφ (hs, hi, a)
, h0 i, d, t, Mφ )]
q(a) ← q(a) + C1 [r + γF SSS(hs0S
solved-belief-states ← solved-belief-states {hs, hi}
π(hs, hi) ← argmaxa q(a)
return π(hs, hi)
Algorithm 3: BFS3(s, h, d, t, φ)

First, an MDP M is sampled from the posterior φ|h, and
then the next state and reward are sampled from M . To reconstruct the resulting belief-state, we pack s0 with the new
history made by augmenting h with (s, a, s0 , r), resulting in
a transition from belief-state hs, hi to hs0 , h ∪ (s, a, s0 , r)i.

gorithm 3. For some MDP prior φ(M ), the joint transition
and reward function T -Rφ is constructed such that

5

P (hs0 , h ∪ (s, a, s0 , r)i, r|hs, hi, a) =
R
P (s0 , r|s, a, M )φ(M |h)dM.
M
Since, with FSSS, the next belief-states are only sampled
and their likelihoods are never calculated, a simple generative process can be used:
M

∼ φ|h

(1)

0

∼ TM (s, a), RM (s, a).

(2)

s ,r

This process is used whenever BFS3 or its subroutine FSSS
sample a next-state and reward. The algorithm never holds
on to an individual MDP after a single transition has been

Figure 1 illustrates the BFS3’s process for each belief-state
visited by the agent. In the future, the agent may find itself
in one of the reachable belief-states in the search tree.
In many cases, the history h can be summarized by a more
compact sufficient statistic, and next-state posteriors can be
sampled efficiently (for example, the FDM prior detailed in
Section 2).

Near Bayes-optimal behavior

An agent achieves Bayes-optimal behavior (Wang et al.,
2005; Duff & Barto, 1997) if it operates according to a
policy that maximizes expected discounted cumulative reward with respect to some MDP prior φ. Built into this
policy are both explorative and exploitative actions. To the
Bayes-optimal agent, exploration and exploitation are the
same thing. An agent is near Bayes-optimal if it has approximately Bayes-optimal behavior for all but a number
of steps that is polynomial with the parameters of the environment.
If one were to run Sparse Sampling on the belief-MDP
out to the correct depth, it would return the approximately
Bayes-optimal policy. Since FSSS, when given enough

time, always agrees with Sparse Sampling, we know that
as we give it more computational resources the resulting
policy will approach approximate Bayes-optimality.
The interesting case is when computation time is limited,
and FSSS cannot expand the full search tree that Sparse
Sampling would discover. We shall consider computation
time in terms of queries to the oracle, that is, times samples
are drawn from the distribution described in Equations 1
and 2.
For a given value estimation, FSSS will query the oracle at
most t · d · A · C times, where t is the number of trajectories
that will be simulated, d is the maximum depth of any trajectory, A is the number of actions available, and C is the
number of times each action is tried for a given node in the
tree. On a step for which BFS3 needs to plan, it will use
FSSS to estimate the value for C · A different states, for a
total of t · d · A2 · C 2 oracle queries.
To determine whether or not this number of queries is efficient, we can examine each of the factors. A is provided by
the domain. For a particular desired accuracy , states beyond a certain depth have too small an impact on the value
at the root (due to discounting). This depth d grows (or
shrinks) with logγ .
The remaining factors, t and C, are often considered to be
free parameters. As t and C grow, so does the accuracy
of the computed policy. Theory gives worst-case bounds
for both of these values. In the worst case (combination
lock (Li, 2009)), t must be equal to the number of possible
combinations, or Ad . In the worst case, C must be so high
as to paint a picture that is accurate for all t · d · A estimated
transition functions with high probability, simultaneously,
resulting in a ludicrous number that can only be used in the
most trivial of domains.
In practice, both t and C may be set to values significantly
smaller than the worst case. Many domains are “deterministic with noise”, meaning that only a few queries are
necessary for each node—enough to be sure of the nextstate distribution’s mode—and C can be quite low. Also,
many domains have widely varying rewards that can help
an MCTS planner decide which parts of the state space to
consider first, allowing t to be much more manageable.
Therefore, we shall operate on the theoretically dubious
but practically reasonable premise that both t = t0 and
C = C0 are small, but large enough that an agent using
FSSS (equipped with the true model as its oracle) to plan
will behave approximately optimally. We will express our
bounds in terms of these parameters.
5.1

Proof of Near Bayes-optimality

We next lay out an argument for why BFS3 has near Bayesoptimal behavior for discrete state and action space MDPs

with known reward functions and known terminal states.
In this context, a sufficient statistic for the belief-state is
the pairing of the real state and the next-state histograms
for each state-action pair.
5.1.1

Theorem statement

If: 1. FSSS, given the true MDP m0 and some bound on
computational resources, can provide accurate value estimates with high probability, and 2. the posterior next-state
distribution for some state-action pair, given N examples,
will be an accurate estimate of m0 ’s next-state distribution
with high probability, then: with high probability, BFS3
will behave Bayes-optimally for all but a polynomial number of steps.
5.1.2

Proof (sketch)

First, we will show that there is a belief-MDP, constructed
from the prior φ, whose optimal policy is the Bayesoptimal policy for m0 ∼ φ. Then, we will show that
BFS3, acting in the belief-MDP, will satisfy the three criteria required for PAC-MDP behavior (Kakade, 2003; Li,
2009) in that belief-MDP3 . These criteria are: 1. accuracy,
2. bounded discoveries, and 3. optimism.
First, because of Condition 2 in our theorem statement, we
know that once we have received N examples of transitions
from a state-action pair (s, a), our estimate of the next-state
distribution for that pair will be accurate. (This condition
need not hold for degenerate priors, but it appears to hold
quite broadly.)
Second, since we forget all additional transitions from
state-action pairs for which we have seen N examples, the
number of possible state-histories that an agent can observe
is bounded. Specifically, each time a transition from some
state-action (s, a) is observed, either no change will be
made to the state-action’s histogram (it already sums to N ),
or exactly one entry in the histogram will be incremented
by 1. Since the histogram can be changed at most N times,
the total number of histories possible for an agent over the
course of a single experiment is N · S · A (N histories for
each state-action pair).
A discovery event, or one that potentially changes the MDP
posterior, is an event that results in a change to the history.
There are N · S · A discoveries possible, since other transitions will be forgotten.
Third, FSSS(s0 , d, t, Mφ ) is guaranteed to have an optimistic value estimate for belief-state s0 as t (the number of
trajectories), our bounded resource, grows smaller. We also
know that, from Condition 1 of the theorem, t is sufficient
to find accurate estimates of s0 if all states in s0 ’s subtree
have converged next-state posteriors. Simply put, if s0 ’s
3
PAC-MDP behavior in the belief-MDP implies near Bayesoptimal behavior in the learning setting.

subtree has no unknown state-action pairs, then FSSS’s estimate of that state’s value will be accurate. As a result, if
FSSS’s estimate of a state’s value is inaccurate, there must
be something to learn about in s0 ’s subtree. FSSS guarantees that this inaccuracy will be optimistic.
Also possible is that the value estimate of s0 is accurate
and there are unknown states in its subtree. In this case,
the agent can decide whether or not to visit that state fully
informed of its value, and can take a Bayes-optimal action.
The PAC-MDP criteria direct the agent to areas of either high value or high uncertainty, managing the exploration/exploitation tradeoff. Because the agent will only
go to areas of high uncertainty over areas of high reward a
bounded number of times that grows linearly with the number of possible discovery events, we bound the number of
sub-optimal steps taken over the lifetime of the agent.
For a formal proof of BFS3’s near Bayes-optimality, see
the appendix (Asmuth & Littman, 2011).
The theoretical result given has practical implications.
BFS3, in effect, has a computational resources knob. When
the knob is set to allow unbounded computation, BFS3 will
make Bayes-optimal decisions. When the knob is tuned to
only allow the minimal computation needed to solve a sampled MDP, BFS3 will behave no worse than a PAC-MDP
algorithm. Thus, the algorithm introduces a new kind of
exploration/computation tradeoff that is not present in existing model-based RL approaches. The community has
been grappling with this tradeoff at a high level by proposing algorithms at various points along the spectrum. Ours
is the first algorithm that treats this tradeoff parametrically.

6

Experimentation

To demonstrate BFS3, we will show its performance in
a number of domains, and show how the use of different
priors can affect its performance. This flexibility with respect to using different priors is a compelling reason to use
MCTS algorithms in general, and BFS3 in particular, for
model-based reinforcement learning.
When using the FDM prior with a small state space, BEB
may be considered a better choice. Since BEB operates
greedily according to a grounded MDP, rather than a beliefMDP, planning is made potentially much easier. This algorithm is limited, however, in that it requires a known reward
function; it can only deal with uncertainty in the transition
function.
BFS3, with the right prior, can handle unknown rewards. In
many domains, there are only a few possible reward values.
For example, many path-finding domains give a reward of
−1 for all actions. Or, there is a reward for a particular
outcome that can be achieved from multiple states: these
states would share the same reward value. To represent

Figure 2: Here BFS3/FDM, with both known rewards and
unknown rewards with a DP prior, is compared against
the known-reward BEB, and RMAX (Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002), a well known algorithm with PAC-MDP guarantees, with M = 5. Results are averaged over 40 runs.
this common structure in a generative model, the Dirichlet
Process (DP) (MacEachern & Muller, 1998) may be used:
Rs,a

∼ DP(α, Unif(Rmin , Rmax )).

Note that with this prior, rewards are deterministic, if unknown.
In Figure 2, BFS3, with the unknown reward prior, is
shown to suffer no significant performance penalty compared to BFS3 with the known-reward prior and to BEB
(which also uses the known-reward prior). The domain is
a 5 × 5 grid world, where the agent must find its way from
one corner to the other. The agent can choose to go north,
east, south or west, and with probability 0.2 it will go in a
direction perpendicular to the one intended.
Along with FDM, we introduce the Factored-Object prior,
which describes factored MDPs in which the state features
are broken up into a number of independent yet identical
objects. The action also has two features: the first indicates
which object is being acted upon, and the second indicates
which action is being performed. Factored-Object essentially has a single FDM posterior, which it applies to each
object in the state simultaneously, sharing both information
(for faster convergence) and memory.
For a single object, Factored-Object and FDM are the
same. For two objects, FDM has to learn separately how
a particular action affects a particular object for every possible configuration of objects—for a different state of an
object not being operated on, FDM must re-learn how the
original object is affected. Factored-Object allows the
agent to learn about multiple objects at the same time: it
knows that a given action affects object 1 in the same way
it affects object 2, and generalizes appropriately.

BFS3 can also be used to apply Bayesian modeling to
POMDPs. Wumpus World (Russell & Norvig, 1994) is
based a classic computer game in which an agent wanders
through a 4 × 4 maze filled with fog, making it impossible
to see past its current cell. Even though the agent cannot
see, it can feel a breeze if there is a pit in an adjacent cell,
and smell a stench if there is a Wumpus4 near-by. If the
agent falls into a pit, it will remain there forever. If the
agent runs into the Wumpus, it is eaten. If the agent shoots
its one arrow in the direction of the Wumpus, the Wumpus
is slain. If the arrow misses the Wumpus, the trial ends and
presumably the agent goes home. We replicate the dynamics presented in detail by Sorg et al. (2010).
Wumpus World is based on a deterministic process, but
since the agent only knows attributes of cells that it has visited, it appears stochastic. The prior over different possible
mazes is known and given to the agent, and from this it can
infer the correct posterior distribution over what happens
when it performs a particular action in a particular beliefstate.
We ran BFS3 on Wumpus World with a search depth of 15,
and varied the number of trajectories per step. Agents with
500, 1000, and 5000 trajectories per step averaged 0.267,
0.358 and 0.499 cumulative reward, respectively. Averages were taken over 1000 attempts. We compare this to
a variance-based reward bonus strategy (Sorg et al., 2010)
which, when tuned, averaged 0.508.
That BFS3 performs better in Wumpus World as the computation budget is increased supports our argument that the
algorithm has a computational resources knob which, when
tuned higher, causes the agent’s behavior to get closer to
being Bayes-optimal at the cost of decision-making speed.

7

Concluding Remarks

The use of Bayesian methods with flexible priors has been
a boon to machine learning and artificial intelligence. Similarly, the use of model priors in Bayesian reinforcement
learning is a powerful tool for incorporating prior knowledge into an algorithm in a principled way. However, most
algorithms that make use of any prior use only the Flat
Dirichlet Multinomial (FDM). While appropriate for many
situations, this prior does not provide for any generaliza4

A Wumpus is a monster that eats RL agents.

Cumulative Reward

Cumulative Reward

The Paint/Polish world (Walsh et al., 2009) provides a situation where the simple and convenient FDM prior is insufficient. The size of the state-space grows exponentially
with the number of cans to paint (each of which introduces
four binary features). Figure 3 shows the results with a
single can (and 24 states) and the results with two cans
(and 24·2 states). If the number of cans is increased to four,
FDM cannot find a good policy in a reasonable amount of
time while Factored-Object can do so in around ten trials.

Trials

Trials

Figure 3: BFS3 with FDM and Factored-Object priors.
Left: Paint/Polish with 1 can. FDM and Factored-Object
are identical for one object, and give the same performance.
Right: Paint/Polish with 2 cans. Factored-Object outperforms FDM because it is better able to generalize. Results
are averaged over 40 runs.

tion across states or for continuous state spaces severely
limiting its applicability.
Cluster is an interesting prior that can be used instead of
FDM. In degenerate cases, it will converge to the same
point as FDM, but very often it will detect that groups of
states share dynamics and can be clustered together. Algorithms that limit themselves to FDM cannot make use of
this or any other generalizing prior.
Though limited in other ways, FDM does have at least
one property that makes it more attractive than many other
prior distributions: it makes posterior sampling trivial. Especially for MCTS approaches, posterior sampling needs
to be fast, as it is done often. The aforementioned Cluster prior is difficult to use with MCTS strategies because
sampling from its posterior involves Markov chain MonteCarlo techniques (Neal, 2000), and requires a great deal of
computation.
BOSS (Asmuth et al., 2009) can make use of flexible priors, and uses sample redundancy and posterior variance
to ensure constant optimism, and is PAC-MDP. However,
it is very conservative and will often over-explore. Like
BOSS, the variance-based reward bonus approach (Sorg
et al., 2010) draws upon posterior variance of any prior to
encourage exploration to unknown states, but does so in a
different way that gives it near Bayes-optimality.
The algorithm we have introduced, BFS3, has the best of
both worlds: it can make use of a wide variety of priors,
and it is near Bayes-optimal. Its weakness is computation.
For some prior distributions (Cluster), posterior samples
can be expensive, and for others a large branching factor C
must be used. Both increase the computational power required to ensure good behavior. Despite this weakness the
great flexibility it offers, in terms of domains and of priors,
make it an attractive application of Bayesian techniques for
reinforcement learning.
PAC-MDP and near Bayes-optimal differ in important

ways. Near Bayes-optimal is a claim made in the context of some prior distribution, where PAC-MDP is a claim
made in the context of any possible underlying model. Algorithms that are PAC-MDP will therefore over-explore,
while near Bayes-optimal algorithms will explore just the
right amount, according to the prior.
The exploration/exploitation dilemma is central to the RL
community. PAC-MDP and Bayes-optimal guarantees represent two important approaches to this problem. PACMDP algorithms address the issue by spending a budget
of exploration steps toward improving their models to the
point at which they are accurate. Bayes-optimal algorithms address the issue by planning in belief-space, turning the exploration/exploitation dilemma into just exploitation: learning is planning.

References
Asmuth, J., Li, L., Littman, M., Nouri, A., & Wingate, D. (2009).
A Bayesian sampling approach to exploration in reinforcement
learning. Proceedings of the 25th Conference on Uncertainty
in Artifical Intelligence (UAI-09).
Asmuth, J., & Littman, M. (2011). Appendix (Technical Report
DCS-tr-687). Rutgers University department of Computer Science.
Auer, P., Cesa-Bianchi, N., & Fischer, P. (2002). Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit problem. Machine Learning, 47,
235–256.
Brafman, R. I., & Tennenholtz, M. (2002). R-MAX—A general polynomial time algorithm for near-optimal reinforcement
learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3, 213–231.

Leffler, B. R., Littman, M. L., & Edmunds, T. (2007). Efficient reinforcement learning with relocatable action models. Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI-07).
Li, L. (2009). A unifying framework for computational reinforcement learning theory (pp 78-79). Doctoral dissertation, Rutgers University.
MacEachern, S. N., & Muller, P. (1998). Estimating mixture
of Dirichlet process models. Journal of Computational and
Graphical Statistics, 7, 223–238.
Neal, R. M. (2000). Markov chain sampling methods for dirichlet
process mixture models. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, Vol. 9, pp. 249–265.
Poupart, P., Vlassis, N., Hoey, J., & Regan, K. (2006). An analytic
solution to discrete Bayesian reinforcement learning. Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 697–704).
Puterman, M. L. (1994). Markov decision processes—discrete
stochastic dynamic programming. New York, NY: John Wiley
& Sons, Inc.
Russell, S. J., & Norvig, P. (1994). Artificial intelligence: A modern approach. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Sorg, J., Singh, S., & Lewis, R. L. (2010). Variance-based rewards
for approximate Bayesian reinforcement learning. Proceedings
of the 26th Conference on Uncertainty in Artifical Intelligence
(UAI-10).
Strehl, A. L., Diuk, C., & Littman, M. L. (2007). Efficient
structure learning in factored-state MDPs. Proceedings of the
Twenty-Second National Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI-07).

Duff, M. (2003). Design for an optimal probe. Proceedings of the
20th International Conference on Machine Learning.

Strehl, A. L., & Littman, M. L. (2008). An analysis of modelbased interval estimation for Markov decision processes. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 74, 1309–1331. Special
Issue on Learning Theory.

Duff, M. O., & Barto, A. G. (1997). Local bandit approximation
for optimal learning problems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 1019–1025). The MIT Press.

Strens, M. J. A. (2000). A Bayesian framework for reinforcement
learning. Proceedings of the Seventeenth International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2000) (pp. 943–950).

Gelly, S., & Silver, D. (2008). Achieving master level play in 9x9
computer go. Proceedings of the 23rd national conference on
Artificial intelligence - Volume 3 (pp. 1537–1540). Chicago,
Illinois: AAAI Press.

Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement learning: An
introduction. The MIT Press.

Kakade, S. M. (2003). On the sample complexity of reinforcement
learning. Doctoral dissertation, Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London.
Kearns, M., Mansour, Y., & Ng, A. Y. (1999). A sparse sampling
algorithm for near-optimal planning in large Markov decision
processes. Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-99) (pp. 1324–
1331).
Kocsis, L., & Szepesvári, C. (2006). Bandit based Monte-Carlo
planning. Proceedings of the 17th European Conference on
Machine Learning (ECML-06) (pp. 282–293). Springer Berlin
/ Heidelberg.
Kolter, J. Z., & Ng, A. Y. (2009). Near-Bayesian exploration in
polynomial time. Proceedings of the 26th Annual International
Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 513–520). New York,
NY, USA: ACM.

Walsh, T., Goschin, S., & Littman, M. (2010). Integrating samplebased planning and model-based reinforcement learning. Proceedings of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence.
Walsh, T. J., Szita, I., Diuk, C., & Littman, M. L. (2009). Exploring compact reinforcement-learning representations with linear regression. Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Conference on
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (pp. 591–598). Arlington,
Virginia, United States: AUAI Press.
Wang, T., Lizotte, D., Bowling, M., & Schuurmans, D. (2005).
Bayesian sparse sampling for on-line reward optimization.
ICML ’05: Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference
on Machine Learning (pp. 956–963). New York, NY, USA:
ACM.
Wilson, A., Fern, A., Ray, S., & Tadepalli, P. (2007). Multi-task
reinforcement learning: A hierarchical Bayesian approach.
Machine Learning, Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Conference (ICML 2007) (pp. 1015–1022).

