Suboptimality Bounds for Stochastic Shortest Path Problems

Eric A. Hansen
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
Mississippi State University
Mississippi State, MS 39762
hansen@cse.msstate.edu

Abstract
We consider how to use the Bellman residual of
the dynamic programming operator to compute
suboptimality bounds for solutions to stochastic
shortest path problems. Such bounds have been
previously established only in the special case
that “all policies are proper,” in which case the
dynamic programming operator is known to be
a contraction, and have been shown to be easily
computable only in the more limited special case
of discounting. Under the condition that transition costs are positive, we show that suboptimality bounds can be easily computed even when not
all policies are proper. In the general case when
there are no restrictions on transition costs, the
analysis is more complex. But we present preliminary results that show such bounds are possible.

1

Introduction

A stochastic shortest path problem is a Markov decision
process (MDP) where the objective is to find a minimumcost policy that reaches a goal or terminal state with probability 1 [4, 2]. It is an elegant model for many problems
of planning under uncertainty, especially for goal-oriented
decision-theoretic planning problems where policy execution terminates once a goal condition is achieved. Standard
solution methods rely on dynamic programming or linear
programming. The model is also used in the development
and analysis of reinforcement learning and heuristic search
algorithms for MDPs [15, 1, 6]. There are extensions of the
stochastic shortest path problem for planning under partial
observability [11], multi-agent planning [12, 8], and risksensitive planning [10].
For the stochastic shortest path problem, the expected total
cost of policy execution is bounded, without discounting.
Thus it is an important alternative to the discounted infinitehorizon MDP as a model for decision-theoretic planning.

Although use of a discount factor sometimes has an economic justification, discounting is not well-motivated for
many AI planning problems and has potential drawbacks.
It can skew the relative values of policies and change the
optimal policy. Discounting can also make it impossible
to guarantee that dynamic programming finds a policy that
reaches a goal state with probability 1. With discounting,
a policy that cycles forever without reaching the goal state
still has finite total cost, which could be less than the cost
of the best policy that is guaranteed to reach the goal state.
Despite potential drawbacks, the discounted infinitehorizon model is widely used. One reason for its appeal is
that discounting is a simple way to ensure that algorithms
for solving infinite-horizon MDPs have the desired convergence properties, since the dynamic programming operator
is a contraction operator in this case, with the contraction
rate equal to the discount factor. Although the convergence
of value iteration and policy iteration for stochastic shortest
path problems is well-established, it is not based on a contraction property (except in the special case that all policies
are proper). As a result, there is no guarantee that the convergence rate is geometric and suboptimality bounds are
generally not available for solutions found by dynamic programming, in contrast to the discounted case.
In this paper, we show that even though the dynamic programming operator for stochastic shortest path problems
is not a contraction operator in general, it behaves like
a contraction operator if the dynamic programming algorithm is started with the value function of a proper policy,
which is a policy that achieves the goal state with probability one. Under the additional condition that transition
costs are positive, we show how to use the Bellman residual
of the dynamic programming operator to compute suboptimality bounds. In the general case where there are no restrictions on action costs, the analysis is more complex. But
we establish some preliminary results that support a general
approach to computing bounds. Our results apply to both
completely observable and partially observable stochastic
shortest path problems.

2

Background

A stochastic shortest path problem is solved by finding an
optimal policy µ∗ satisfying

We begin with a review of the stochastic shortest path problem as formulated by Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis [3, 4, 5] and
extended to the partially observable case by Patek [11].
We also review previous work on computing suboptimality bounds for solutions found by dynamic programming.
2.1

Stochastic shortest path problem

Like any discrete-time Markov decision process (MDP), a
stochastic shortest path problem includes a set of states, S,
and a set of control actions, U , which we assume are both
finite; a set of transition probabilities, where pij (u) denotes
the probability that the system moves to state j ∈ S after
action u ∈ U is taken in state i ∈ S; and a set of real-valued
costs, where g(i, u, j) denotes the cost incurred when action u taken in state i results in a transition to state j.
The expected
∑ cost of taking action u in state i is denoted
g(i, u) = j∈S pij (u)g(i, u, j).
In addition, a stochastic shortest path problem is characterized by a set of assumptions from which it derives its
special properties. The first is the following.
Assumption 1. The state set includes a special target or
terminal state, t ∈ S, which is zero-cost and absorbing,
which means that ptt (u) = 1 and g(t, u, t) = 0, ∀u ∈ U .
The objective is to find a stationary policy, µ : S → U , that
reaches the terminal state while minimizing the total expected cost. We are especially interested in stationary policies that reach the terminal state with probability 1 from
any initial state, called proper policies.
Definition 1 (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis). A stationary policy
µ is said to be proper if there exists a finite positive integer
m such that there is a positive probability of reaching the
terminal state after at most m stages when following this
policy, regardless of the initial state, that is,
ρµ = min P (xm = t|x0 = i, µ) > 0,
i∈S

(1)

J ∗ (i) = Jµ∗ (i) ≤ Jµ (i), ∀i ∈ S, ∀µ ∈ M,

where J ∗ denotes the optimal value function. Two additional assumptions of the stochastic shortest path problem
ensure that an optimal policy exists and that it is proper.
Assumption 2. There exists at least one proper policy.
Assumption 3. For every improper policy µ, the corresponding cost Jµ (i) is infinite for at least one state i.
Assumption 3 is equivalent to the assumption that the expected cost Jµ (i) of state i under policy µ is infinite if a
process started in state i and following policy µ does not
reach the terminal state with probability 1.
Two special cases of the stochastic shortest path problem
play an important role in the analysis of Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis [3, 4, 5]. The first is the stochastic shortest path problem when all policies are proper. Analysis of this special
case is easier, although the assumption that all policies are
proper is often unrealistic. Another special case is the discounted infinite-horizon MDP. By a well-known reduction,
any discounted infinite-horizon MDP can be reduced to an
equivalent stochastic shortest path problem in which, for
every state and action pair, there is a probability (1 − β) of
making a transition to the terminal state, where β < 1 is the
discount factor, with the other transition probabilities normalized. For the stochastic shortest path problem created
by this reduction, all policies are proper. As we will see,
the well-known convergence properties and suboptimality
bounds for the discounted infinite-horizon MDP are a special case of those for the stochastic shortest path problem.
2.2

Dynamic programming

The stochastic shortest path problem can be solved using
dynamic programming, where the dynamic programming
operator is defined as follows,
∑
T J(i) = min
pij (u) (g(i, u, j) + J(j)), ∀i ∈ S, (4)
u∈U

where xk denotes the state of the process at stage k. A stationary policy that is not proper is said to be improper.
Following a policy that is proper according to this definition, a process reaches the terminal state with probability 1,
regardless of the initial state [2].
The value (or cost-to-go) function Jµ of a stationary policy µ gives the expected total cost of following the policy
starting from an initial state i, defined as
[N −1
]
∑
Jµ (i) = lim Eµ
g(xk , µ(xk ))|x0 = i , ∀i ∈ S. (2)
N →∞

k=0

For a proper policy µ, the expected cost is bounded above
for each state, that is, Jµ (i) < ∞, ∀i ∈ S.

(3)

j∈S

and the related policy evaluation operator Tµ is defined as,
∑
Tµ J(i) =
pij (µ(i)) (g(i, µ(i), j) + J(j)), ∀i ∈ S. (5)
j∈S

These operators are the key steps in two dynamic programming algorithms: value iteration and policy iteration.
Analysis of the convergence of value and policy iteration
turns on two properties of the dynamic programming and
policy evaluation operators: the monotonicity property and
the contraction property. The monotonicity property is defined as follows: if J ≤ J ′ , then T J ≤ T J ′ and Tµ J ≤
Tµ J ′ .1 Both operators satisfy the monotonicity property.
1

As shorthand, we let J ≤ J ′ denote J(i) ≤ J ′ (i), ∀i ∈ S.

An operator T , such as the dynamic programming operator,
is said to be a contraction operator if, for all bounded value
functions J and J ′ ,
||T J − T J ′ || ≤ β||J − J ′ ||,

(6)

where β, with 0 ≤ β < 1, is the contraction rate and ||.||
is some norm. For discounted infinite-horizon MDPs, it is
well-known that both the dynamic programming operator
T and the policy evaluation operator Tµ are contraction operators, with the contraction rate β equal to the discount
factor. If the state space is finite, they are contraction operators in the maximum norm, defined as ||x|| = maxi∈S x(i).
If the state space is continuous, they are contraction operators in the supremum norm, defined as ||x|| = supi∈S x(i).
For MDPs, the maximum or supremum norm, ||T J − J||,
is called the Bellman residual.
For the stochastic shortest path problem, there is no discount factor (or equivalently, the discount factor is 1). In
this case, a related concept of contraction operator is useful. An operator T is said to be an m-stage contraction operator if T m , which is the composition of T with itself m
times, is a contraction operator, that is, if there is some β,
with 0 ≤ β < 1, and some norm ||.||, such that
||T m J − T m J ′ || < β||J − J ′ ||,

(7)

for all bounded value functions J and J ′ . For the stochastic shortest path problem, the dynamic programming operator is an m-stage contraction operator in the maximum (or
supremum) norm if there is some minimum positive probability ρm = (1 − β) > 0 that the process reaches the terminal state within m steps, beginning from any state. Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis [3, 4, 5] show that the dynamic programming operator for stochastic shortest path problems is
an m-stage contraction operator in the special case that all
policies are proper.2 As for the policy evaluation operator,
it is an m-stage contraction if it evaluates a proper policy.
The significance of showing that the dynamic programming and policy evaluation operators satisfy the contraction
property, under the condition that all policies are proper,
is that the convergence of both value iteration and policy
iteration follows from Banach’s Fixed-Point Theorem; it
also follows that the convergence rate is geometric. Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis consider this special case first because
2
The minimum probability ρm that the terminal state will be
reached in m stages can be computed by solving a finite-horizon
MDP with the same transition probabilities as the stochastic shortest path problem but with a cost of 1 for any transition to the
terminal state, and a cost of 0 for all other transitions. Finding a
policy that minimizes the m-horizon cost corresponds to finding
a policy that minimizes the probability of reaching the terminal
state within m stages. By Definition 1, the minimum probability
of reaching the terminal state within m stages is greater than zero,
for some positive integer m, if all policies are proper.

the dynamic programming operator is not a contraction operator in the general case. In the words of Bertsekas and
Tsitsiklis [4], “our assumptions do not imply that the corresponding dynamic programming mapping is a contraction (unlike the situation in discounted problems), unless
all policies are proper.” They give an example to show that
the contraction property does not hold in general. It is a
stochastic shortest path problem with two states: state 1 is
terminal and state 2 is nonterminal. Two actions are possible in the nonterminal state. One causes a deterministic
transition to the terminal state with a cost of 2; the other
causes a deterministic self-transition with a cost of 1. Thus
there are two stationary policies, one proper and the other
improper. Consider two value functions J and J ′ for which
J(1) = J ′ (1) = 0, J(2) < 1, and J ′ (2) < 1. Under these
conditions, |T J(2) − T J ′ (2)| = |(J(2) + 1) − (J ′ (2) +
1)| = |J(2) − J ′ (2)|, which shows that, in general, T is not
a contraction with respect to any norm.
The principal contribution of Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis to the
theory of stochastic shortest path problems is their proofs
of the convergence of value iteration and policy iteration in
the general case, where the dynamic programming operator is not a contraction. Given only the assumptions of the
stochastic shortest path problem, they prove the following.
• The optimal value function J ∗ is the unique solution
of the Bellman equation J ∗ = T J ∗ , and value iteration converges to it, which means that for any initial
value function J, limt→∞ T t J = J ∗ .
• The value function Jµ of a proper policy µ is the
unique solution of the linear system of equations,
Jµ = Tµ Jµ , and policy evaluation converges to it,
which means limt→∞ Tµt J = Jµ , for any initial J.
• Starting with a proper policy µ0 , policy iteration generates a sequence of policies µ1 , µ2 , . . ., for which
Jµk+1 ≤ Jµk , ∀k, by alternating a policy evaluation
step that computes Jµk , with a policy improvement
step that computes an improved policy µk+1 using the
equation Tµk+1 Jµk = T Jµk , or equivalently, ∀i ∈ S,
µk+1(i) = arg min
u∈U

∑

(
)
pij (u) g(i,u,j)+Jµk(j) ,

(8)

j∈S

and the sequence converges to an optimal policy.
However, their convergence results are weaker than those
based on the contraction property and Banach’s FixedPoint Theorem because they establish pointwise convergence, not uniform convergence. As a result, they provide
no guarantee that the rate of convergence is geometric and
no way to bound the number of iterations until convergence
to an ϵ-optimal policy. They also do not allow easy use of
the Bellman residual to compute suboptimality bounds.

2.3

Suboptimality bounds

We next review how to use the Bellman residual of the dynamic programming operator to bound the suboptimality
of solutions found by dynamic programming. For stochastic shortest path problems, Bertsekas [2, pp. 413–414] gives
the following result.
Theorem 1 (Bertsekas). For any stochastic shortest path
problem, any value function J, a greedy policy µ with respect to J, and for all i ∈ S, the following bounds hold,
J(i) + cN ∗ (i) ≤ J ∗ (i) ≤ Jµ (i) ≤ J(i) + cNµ (i), (9)
where c = mini∈S [T J(i) − J(i)], N ∗ (i) is an upper
bound on the expected number of steps needed to reach
the terminal state t beginning from state i and following
an optimal policy, c = maxi∈S [T J(i) − J(i)], and Nµ (i)
is an upper bound on the expected number of steps needed
to reach t beginning from state i and following policy µ.
Some simplifications can help bring this result into focus.
Leaving out the inequalities involving Jµ and subtracting
J(i), we have: cN ∗ (i) ≤ J ∗ (i) − J(i) ≤ cNµ (i). Note
that c ≤ 0 and c ≥ 0. Note also that the Bellman residual
is: ||T J − J|| = max{−c, c}. Thus we have:
|J ∗ (i) − J(i)| ≤ ||T J − J|| · max{N ∗ (i), Nµ (i)}. (10)

Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis [5, pp. 23–24] describe how to
bound the expected number of stages until termination for
any stochastic shortest path problem for which all policies are proper, although it requires solving an MDP of
the same size as the original stochastic shortest path problem. Given a stochastic shortest-path problem, consider a
related infinite-horizon MDP where the transition probabilities are the same but there is a cost of 0 for any transition
to the terminal state and all other transitions incur a cost
of −1. For this MDP, finding a policy that minimizes the
expected infinite-horizon cost corresponds to finding a policy that maximizes the expected number of stages it takes
to reach the terminal state. The values computed by solving this MDP bound the number of stages until termination
for any policy. Obviously, these bounds are finite (and the
MDP is well-defined) if and only if all policies are proper.
If a greedy policy µ with respect to value function J is
not proper, then Nµ (i) is not finite for at least one state i
and the bounds of Equations 10 and 11 are not finite. We
address the challenge of how to compute bounds when not
all policies are proper beginning in Section 3.
2.4

Partial observability

In addition to this bound on the suboptimality of a value
function J, the inequalities Jµ (i) ≤ J(i)+cNµ (i) in Equation 9 let us bound the suboptimality of a greedy policy µ
with respect to J. It follows that we can compute suboptimality bounds if we can compute the bounds N ∗ (i) and
Nµ (i) on the expected number of stages until termination.
“Unfortunately,” writes Bertsekas [2, pp. 413–414], these
bounds “are easily computed or approximated only in the
presence of special problem structure.”

Patek [11] extends the framework of stochastic shortest
path problems to the partially observable case. A partially
observable MDP (POMDP) includes the same states, actions, transition probabilities and costs defined earlier, plus
a finite set of observation symbols, Z, and a set of observation probabilities, where pz (j, u) denotes the probability
that symbol z ∈ Z is observed after action u ∈ U results
in a transition to state j ∈ S. In addition to the three assumptions of a stochastic shortest path problem given in
Section 2.1, a partially observable stochastic shortest path
problem includes an assumption that ensures that termination of the process is perfectly recognized.
Assumption 4. The set of observation symbols includes a
special symbol, zt ∈ Z, which is unique to transitions to
the terminal state t. That is, pzt (t, u) = 1 and pzt (j, u) =
0, ∀u ∈ U, j ∈ S.

Bertsekas mentions just one special case in which these
bounds can be easily computed: the discounted infinitehorizon case. As already pointed out, any discounted
infinite-horizon MDP (with discount factor β) can be reduced to an equivalent stochastic shortest path problem in
which, for every state and action pair, there is a probability (1 − β) of making a transition to a terminal state, with
the other transition probabilities normalized accordingly. It
follows that the expected number
∑∞ of steps until termination,
from any starting state, is t=0 β t = 1/(1 − β). Letting
N ∗ (i) = Nµ (i) = 1/(1 − β), ∀i ∈ S, the well-known
bound on the suboptimality of a value function J, which is
||J ∗ − J|| ≤ ||T J − J||/(1 − β), is seen to be a special
case of the suboptimality bound given by Equation 11.

As is well-known, a POMDP can be solved by dynamic
programming if it is first transformed into an equivalent
completely observable MDP over belief states, where a belief state is an |S|-dimensional vector of probabilities maintained by Bayesian conditioning. Given the assumptions
of the partially observable stochastic shortest path problem, Patek [11] shows that value iteration and policy iteration have the same convergence properties established by
Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis [3, 4] in the completely observable
case. His analysis follows the same outline. In the special
case that all policies are proper, he shows that the dynamic
programming operator is an m-stage contraction operator.
In the general case when not all policies are proper, he
proves convergence without using a contraction property.

Since by definition, ||J ∗ − J|| = maxi∈S |J ∗ (i) − J(i)|,
we finally have:
||J ∗ − J|| ≤ ||T J − J|| · max max{N ∗ (i), Nµ (i)}. (11)
i∈S

3

Uniform improvability and proper policies

The convergence proofs for value iteration and policy iteration given by Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis [3, 4] and Patek [11]
for the general case when not all policies are proper are
significant because they do not depend on the contraction
property. But without a contraction property, they do not
ensure a geometric rate of convergence or provide a way to
use the Bellman residual to compute suboptimality bounds.
In the rest of the paper, we show a way around this.
First, we establish a condition under which a policy found
by dynamic programming is guaranteed to be proper.
Theorem 2. For any stochastic shortest path problem and
any value function J for which T J ≤ J, a greedy policy µ
with respect to J, defined as
∑
µ(i) = argmin
pij (u)(g(i, u, j)+J(j)) , ∀i ∈ S,
u∈U

j∈S

(12)
is a proper policy and Jµ ≤ J.
Proof. The key observation is that T J = Tµ J, which
means that application of the dynamic programming operator T can be viewed as the first application of the policy
evaluation operator Tµ in evaluating a greedy policy µ with
respect to J. When T J ≤ J, we have Tµ J ≤ J. By the
monotonicity property, it follows that every successive iteration of Tµ monotonically improves the value function,
and thus Jµ = limn→∞ Tµn J ≤ Tµ J = T J ≤ J. Since Jµ
is bounded above for every state, µ must be proper.
We call a value function J for which T J ≤ J a uniformly
improvable value function, a term used by others [16, 14].
Consider the subspace of uniformly improvable value functions: J = {J|T J ≤ J}. By the monotonicity property,
this subspace is closed under the dynamic programming
operator. It follows that if value iteration is started with
a value function J ∈ J , a greedy policy with respect to
this value function, and a greedy policy with respect to any
subsequent value function found after any number of iterations of value iteration, must be proper. We already have
the same guarantee for policy iteration. The convergence
proof for policy iteration given by Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis (and by Patek in the partially observable case) requires
the initial policy to be proper; otherwise, the value function computed by policy evaluation is not bounded. Given
an initial proper policy, it follows from the policy improvement theorem that any policy found after any number of iterations of policy iteration must be proper, since the cost of
an improved policy cannot increase for any state. Indeed,
this guarantee holds precisely because the value function
of an initial proper policy µ is uniformly improvable; note
that T Jµ = Jµ implies T Jµ ≤ Jµ . It follows that whether
we use policy iteration or value iteration, we can guarantee
uniform improvability by finding an initial proper policy.

Different algorithms can be used to find an initial proper
policy. Since the better the initial policy and value function,
the sooner policy iteration or value iteration converges, extra computational effort spent trying to find an initial proper
policy that is of high quality could be well-spent. However,
it is not difficult to find some initial proper policy.
Theorem 3. For any stochastic shortest path problem, the
uniform random policy is proper.3
Proof. By Assumption 2, there exists some proper policy
µ. By Definition 1, there is a positive integer m such that
after m stages, there is a probability ρµ > 0 that following
policy µ leads to the terminal state. Since a uniform random
policy selects an action at random based on a uniform probability distribution, it executes the same action as policy µ
for m consecutive stages with probability (1/|U |)m > 0.
It follows that the probability of reaching the terminal state
within m stages by following the uniform random policy is
greater than or equal to (1/|U |)m · ρµ , which is positive,
and thus the uniform random policy is proper.
When the value function is uniformly improvable, we can
simplify the bounds given in Theorem 1 and Equations 10
and 11. Note that when T J ≤ J, we have c = 0. From
Equation 9, it follows that J ∗ (i) ≤ Jµ (i) ≤ J(i), where
µ is a greedy policy with respect to J. Thus µ must be
proper. (This is the same result proved in Theorem 2.) Setting aside the bounds involving Jµ , consider the remaining bounds: J(i) + cN ∗ (i) ≤ J ∗ (i) ≤ J(i). Subtracting J(i), we have: cN ∗ (i) ≤ J ∗ (i) − J(i) ≤ 0. Thus
|J ∗ (i) − J(i)| ≤ −cN ∗ (i). By assumption, T J ≤ J, and
so the Bellman residual is: ||T J −J|| = −c. Thus we have,
|J ∗ (i) − J(i)| ≤ ||T J − J|| · N ∗ (i),

(13)

where N ∗ (i), as defined in Theorem 1, is an upper bound
on the expected number of steps needed to reach the terminal state beginning from state i and following an optimal
policy. By definition, ||J ∗ − J|| = maxi∈S |J ∗ (i) − J(i)|,
and so,
||J ∗ − J|| ≤ ||T J − J|| · N ∗ ,
(14)
where N ∗ = maxi∈S N ∗ (i) is an upper bound on the expected number of steps needed to reach the terminal state
from any other state by following an optimal policy. Note
that Equation 13 is a simplification of Equation 10 and
Equation 14 is a simplification of Equation 11, where both
simplications are possible because the value function J is
uniformly improvable. The condition that J is uniformly
improvable also allows the following simplification.
Theorem 4. If value function J is uniformly improvable,
then any bound on its suboptimality is also a bound on the
suboptimality of a greedy policy µ with respect to J.
Proof. Immediate since Jµ (i) ≤ J(i) if T J ≤ J(i).
3
I am grateful to Bruno Scherrer for the observation expressed
in this theorem and the idea of the proof.

4

Positive transition costs

In this section, we consider a special case of the stochastic shortest path problem where all transition costs incur a
positive cost, except possibly for transitions into the terminal state. By Assumption 1, a transition from the terminal
state to itself has a cost of zero. Because a transition from
a nonterminal state to the terminal state occurs only once,
we do not need to place any restriction on its cost (except,
of course, that it is bounded).
Under this condition on transition costs, we show how
to compute upper bounds, denoted N (i), ∀i ∈ S, on the
expected number of stages until termination of any policy µ for which Jµ ≤ J, where J is uniformly improvable. We use the notation N (i) instead of N ∗ (i) because
these bounds on the expected number of stages until termination apply to any policy µ for which Jµ ≤ J, not
just an optimal policy. Since J ∗ ≤ Jµ ≤ J, we have
N (i) ≥ N ∗ (i), ∀i ∈ S, and so we can use N (i) in place of
N ∗ (i) in Equations 13 and 14 to bound the suboptimality
of solutions found by dynamic programming.
The proof strategy we adopt to establish these bounds is to
show that any policy µ that does not terminate within N (i)
stages on average, beginning from state i, must have an expected cost Jµ (i) greater than J(i), which contradicts the
assumption that Jµ ≤ J. The significance of this strategy
is that it does not require all policies to be proper. It simply
requires a uniformly improvable value function J.
Theorem 5. For any stochastic shortest-path problem for
which g(i, u, j) > 0 for all i ∈ S, u ∈ U, j ∈ S\t, and
for any policy µ with value function Jµ ≤ J, an upper
bound on the mean number of steps until the terminal state
is reached beginning from any state i is
J(i) − a
N (i) =
+ 1,
(15)
b
where a = min{g(i, u, t) : i ∈ S, u ∈ U } denotes the
minimum cost of any transition into the terminal state and
b = min{g(i, u, j) : i ∈ S, u ∈ U, j ̸= t} denotes the
minimum cost of any other transition.
Proof. For any policy µ, let nµ (i) denote the expected
number of steps until the terminal state is reached beginning from state i and following policy µ. Because a
is the minimum cost of any transition into the terminal
state and b is the minimum cost of any other transition,
a + b(nµ (i) − 1) is the minimum cost of any sequence
of nµ (i) transitions that ends in the terminal state; therefore, Jµ (i) ≥ a + b(nµ (i) − 1). Now if N (i) is not an
upper bound on the expected number of stages until termination for some state i, there must be some policy µ for
which both nµ (i) > N (i) and Jµ (i) ≤ J(i). But since
N (i) = (J(i) − a)/b + 1, then nµ (i) > N (i) implies
that Jµ (i) > J(i), which contradicts the assumption that
Jµ ≤ J. It follows that nµ (i) ≤ N (i), ∀i ∈ S.

Figure 1: Gridworld navigation example [13, 9].
Note that the “+1” in Equation 15 counts the transition into
the terminal state. This approach to computing suboptimality bounds works best if transition costs are uniform as well
as positive. If transition costs are positive but non-uniform,
the bounds are still valid, but potentially looser. In this case,
the bounds could be improved by considering the minimum
expected transition cost after an action, instead of simply
the minimum transition cost.
Example For illustration, consider the small gridworld
navigation problem shown in Figure 1. Russell and
Norvig [13] describe a completely observable version of
this gridworld and Parr and Russell [9] describe a partially
observable version. To allow reference to individual states,
we number each cell of the grid from 0 to 10. Figure 1
shows all of the numbers except two; the +1 state is numbered 3 and the −1 state is numbered 6. Any action taken
in either the +1 or the −1 state results in a deterministic
transition to a terminal state (which is not shown) and a reward of +1 or −1 respectively. In all other states, any of
the four possible navigation actions (with one corresponding to each direction of the compass) incurs a negative reward of −0.04, which is equivalent to a positive cost. (For
convenience, we keep the reward-maximization framework
used by Russell and Norvig [13] and Parr and Russell [9].
Note that it is easily transformed to the cost-minimization
framework of a stochastic shortest-path problem.) We use
the same transition and observation probabilities given by
Russell and Norvig [13] and Parr and Russell [9]. For this
example, it is not the case that all policies are proper.
One reason for adopting this simple example is that it is the
same example used by Russell and Norvig [13] to illustrate
how to compute suboptimality bounds for solutions found
by dynamic programming for discounted infinite-horizon
MDPs. However, this example is most naturally formalized
in an undiscounted reward-maximization framework that is
equivalent to a stochastic shortest path problem, as noted
by both Russell and Norvig [13] and Parr and Russell [9].
Although this gridworld example is very simple, it helps to
illustrate several aspects of our approach.
We implemented our approach to computing suboptimality
bounds in exact value iteration and policy iteration algorithms for completely observable and partially observable
stochastic shortest path problems. Table 1 shows the results
for the first 12 iterations of the algorithms, starting from the

Completely observable

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

J
-1.603
-1.570
-1.430
-1.206
-0.876
-0.256
0.153
0.263
0.310
0.333
0.345
0.351
0.358

Value iteration
m
resid.
66.1
65.3
0.9567
61.7
0.8470
56.1
0.7379
47.9
0.6585
32.4
0.6204
22.2
0.4094
19.4
0.2568
18.2
0.1389
17.7
0.0726
17.4
0.0613
17.2
0.0411
17.1
0.0259

error
62.428
52.302
41.433
31.551
20.102
9.075
4.991
2.534
1.282
1.066
0.708
0.442

J
-1.603
-0.885
0.369
0.388
0.388

Partially observable
Policy iteration
m
resid.
66.1
48.1 0.9567
16.8 1.0070
16.3 0.0186
16.3 0.0000

error
46.030
16.880
0.304
0.000

J
-1.603
-1.603
-1.570
-1.430
-1.209
-0.882
-0.266
0.101
0.249
0.299
0.323
0.338
0.347

Value iteration
m
resid.
66.1
66.1
0.9567
65.3
0.8470
61.8
0.7379
56.2
0.6585
48.1
0.6165
32.7
0.4030
23.5
0.2603
19.8
0.1407
18.5
0.0910
17.9
0.0755
17.6
0.0560
17.3
0.0353

error
63.200
55.270
45.560
37.030
29.630
13.160
6.110
2.782
1.686
1.354
0.983
0.612

J
-1.603
-1.033
0.332
0.350
0.363
0.374
0.379
0.383
0.384
0.385
0.385
0.385
0.385

Policy iteration
m
resid.
66.1
51.8
0.9567
17.7
0.8828
17.2
0.1073
16.9
0.4136
16.6
0.0213
16.5
0.0120
16.4
0.0049
16.4
0.0011
16.4
0.0005
15.4
0.0002
15.4
0.0001
15.4
0.0000

error
49.570
18.090
1.851
0.701
0.355
0.204
0.082
0.019
0.010
0.002
0.001
0.000

Table 1: Error bounds and related statistics for solutions found by exact value iteration and policy iteration in solving the gridworld
problem in both its completely and partially observable forms. Only results for the first 12 iterations are shown. In the completely
observable case, policy iteration converges after 4 iterations. For each iteration, J is the smallest value of any state or belief state, that
is, J = mins∈S J(s) in the completely observable case, and J = inf b J(b) in the partially observable case; m = (1 − J)/0.04 + 1 is
an upper bound on the expected number of steps until termination, beginning from any state; resid. is ||T J − J||, the Bellman residual;
and error = m· resid. is the suboptimality bound. Iteration 0 is for the value function of the uniform random policy.

0
1
2
3
4

J(0) N(0)
-1.28 58.0
0.81 5.7
0.81 5.7
0.81 5.7
0.81 5.7

J(1) N(1)
-0.88 48.0
0.87 4.3
0.87 4.3
0.87 4.3
0.87 4.3

J(2) N(2)
-0.32 34.0
0.92 3.1
0.92 3.1
0.92 3.1
0.92 3.1

J(3) N(3)
1.00 1.0
1.00 1.0
1.00 1.0
1.00 1.0
1.00 1.0

J(4) N(4)
-1.52 64.1
0.76 7.0
0.76 7.0
0.76 7.0
0.76 7.0

J(5) N(5)
-0.92 49.0
0.66 9.5
0.66 9.5
0.66 9.5
0.66 9.5

J(6)
-1.00
-1.00
-1.00
-1.00
-1.00

N(6)
51.0
51.0
51.0
51.0
51.0

J(7) N(7)
-1.60 66.1
0.68 9.1
0.71 8.4
0.71 8.4
0.71 8.4

J(8) N(8)
-1.52 64.1
0.39 16.3
0.66 9.6
0.66 9.6
0.66 9.6

J(9)
-1.28
0.44
0.59
0.61
0.61

N(9)
58.1
15.0
11.2
10.7
10.7

J(10) N(10)
-1.22 56.5
-0.88 48.1
0.37 16.8
0.39 16.3
0.39 16.3

Table 2: State values J(i) and upper bounds N (i) on the expected number of steps until termination for each state i of the completely
observable gridworld when solved by policy iteration, beginning from the uniform random policy.

value function of the uniform random policy. The bounds
depend not only on the size of the Bellman residual, but on
the upper bound m = maxi∈S N (i) on the expected number of stages before termination, which in turn depends on
the current value function. In the first couple iterations, the
error bounds are loose because the value function is still
rather poor and m is relatively large. As the value function
improves over successive iterations, the bounds improve
due to a reduction in the expected number of stages until
termination, as well as a decrease in the Bellman residual.
The bounds shown in Table 1 are based on Equation 14,
which means that they are independent of the starting state.
But Equation 13 (upon which Equation 14 is based) lets
us compute a separate suboptimality bound for each state.
These bounds are proportional to the expected number of
transitions needed to reach the goal from each state. In
this respect, they are more realistic than the well-known
suboptimality bound for discounted infinite-horizon MDPs,
which is ||J ∗ −J|| ≤ ||T J −J||/(1−β). The latter assumes
that the expected number of transitions until termination is
1/(1 − β), regardless of the starting state and its distance
from the goal. A second well-known disadvantage of the
suboptimality bound for discounted infinite-horizon MDPs
is that it is looser, and converges more slowly, the closer
the discount factor is to 1. Interestingly, there is something
analogous for stochastic shortest path problems. The suboptimality bound of Equation 14 is looser, and converges
more slowly, the greater the expected number of transitions
until termination starting from the “farthest” state from the

goal, that is, the greater maxi∈S N (i). An advantage of using Equation 13 to compute a separate suboptimality bound
for each state is that many or most bounds can be relatively
tight and converge quickly, even if there is some state that
is very far from the goal state with a suboptimality bound
that converges more slowly.
For the gridworld example in its completely observable
form, Table 2 shows the value J(i) and upper bound N (i)
for each state i, for each iteration of policy iteration. The
smaller N (i) is, the tighter the suboptimality bound. Because the values of states close to the goal tend to converge
faster than the values of states farther from the goal, as illustrated in Table 2, their suboptimality bounds also converge faster. Table 2 does show one anomaly. The upper
bound N (6), which is for the −1 state, is unrealistically
high because it ignores the fact that taking any action in
this state causes an immediate transition to the terminal
state. Taking into account the transition probabilities for
this problem, we could set N (6) equal to 1. Thus we ignore it when computing the bound of Equation 14.
The partially observable version of this problem does not
have a simple solution. After 12 iterations, the number of
vectors used to represent the value function is more than
10, 000! This underscores that, in the partially observable
case, suboptimality bounds are especially useful. The complexity of each iteration of policy or value iteration can
grow exponentially in the number of iterations, and it is
usually not possible to compute an optimal solution.

5

General case

We next consider the general case in which there are no restrictions on transition costs and not all policies are proper.
In this case, it is no longer possible to use the minimum cost
of a transition to bound the average number of stages until
termination of a policy µ for which Jµ ≤ J, since the minimum cost could be zero or negative. The analysis needs
to be more complex. Although we are not yet able to describe a good approach to computing suboptimality bounds
in the general case, we present some preliminary results in
this direction. First we show that the dynamic programming
operator for stochastic shortest path problems behaves like
an m-stage contraction operator, even in the general case.
We also show that it is possible to compute suboptimality bounds in the general case, although the bounds we describe are much too loose to be practical. Finally, we discuss some implications of these results.
5.1

Contraction property

We begin by showing that the dynamic programming operator behaves like an m-stage contraction when applied to a
value function J that is uniformly improvable. This result
is related to Theorem 2, which shows that a greedy policy with respect to a uniformly improvable value function
is a proper policy. For any proper policy, there exists (by
Definition 1) a finite positive integer m such that there is
a positive probability of reaching the terminal state after at
most m stages when following this policy, regardless of the
start state. In the special case of positive transition costs,
Theorem 5 shows how to compute such an m; in that case,
m = maxi∈S N (i). We now show how to compute such an
m for the general case in which there are no restrictions on
transition costs.
Consider a finite-horizon MDP that has the same state set,
action set, transition probabilities and transition costs as the
original stochastic shortest path problem, but where the objective is to compute the minimum k-stage cost, Jk (i), for
each starting state i, of any policy that does not reach the
terminal state within k stages. In solving this finite-horizon
MDP, we must partition the state set into two subsets that
need to be treated separately at each stage k. For one set
of states, denoted Tk , termination within k stages is inevitable under any policy. For the remaining states, S\Tk ,
there is some policy under which the probability of termination within k stages is zero. It is only for the second set
of states that we solve the finite-horizon MDP for k stages.
Note that Tk is a proper subset of S for all k, unless all
policies are proper.
Figure 2 gives the pseudocode for an algorithm that solves
this finite-horizon MDP while distinguishing between these
two sets of states. The horizon is determined dynamically.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

k := 0 /* k is stage */
∀i ∈ S : Jk (i) := 0, a(i) := ∅ /* initialization */
Tk := {t} /* termination within k stages is inevitable */
while (∃i ∈ S\Tk such that Jk (i) ≤ J(i))
k := k + 1
Tk := Tk−1
for each ( i ∈ S\Tk ∑
)
a(i) := {u ∈ U : j∈Tk pij (u) = 0}
/* a(i) is set of actions that don’t lead to a state in Tk */
if (a(i) = ∅) then /* all actions lead to termination */
Tk := Tk ∪ {i}
else /* compute minimal k-stage cost for this state */
∑
Jk (i) := minu∈a(i) j pij (u)(g(i, u, j) + Jk−1 (j))

Figure 2: Algorithm for solving finite-horizon MDP in order to
compute a bound m on the number of stages before termination
with some positive probability of any policy µ for which Jµ ≤ J.

It is the smallest stage k for which Jk (i) + a > J(i), ∀i ∈
S\Tk , where a = min{g(i, u, t) : i ∈ S, u ∈ U } denotes
the minimum cost of any transition to the terminal state and
J is a uniformly improvable value function for the original stochastic shortest path problem. We know the horizon
must be finite because a and J(i) are finite, and (assuming
there exists a policy under which termination can be delayed indefinitely beginning from state i), Jk (i) goes to infinity as k goes to infinity, by Assumption 3. Since Jk (i) is
the minimum cost of any policy that does not reach the terminal state within k stages beginning from state i, Jk (i)+a
is a lower bound on the cost of any policy that reaches
the terminal state in k + 1 stages beginning from state i.
The key observation is that for any policy µ that does not
reach the terminal state within k + 1 stages with probability greater than zero beginning from state i, we have
Jµ (i) ≥ Jk (i) + a > J(i), which contradicts the assumption that Jµ ≤ J. Therefore, we can set m equal to one plus
the smallest k for which Jk (i) + a > J(i), ∀i ∈ S\Tk , and
we have the following result.
Theorem 6. For any stochastic shortest path problem and
for any initial value function J for which T J ≤ J, the
dynamic programming operator T behaves like an m-stage
contraction operator.
We say that the dynamic programming operator behaves
like an m-stage contraction operator, not that it is one, because Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis [3, 4] give an example that
shows that the dynamic programming operator for stochastic shortest path problems is not a contraction with respect
to any norm, unless all policies are proper. (The example is briefly reviewed in Section 2.2). The distinction between being an m-stage contraction and behaving like one
is necessary if we adopt the definition that an operator is
an m-stage contraction if and only if it satisfies the condition expressed by Equation 7 for all bounded value functions [2]. But Theorem 6 only claims that the dynamic programming operator satisfies the m-stage contraction property expressed by Equation 7 for the closed subspace of
uniformly improvable value functions. Thus we could also

say that the dynamic programming operator for stochastic
shortest path problems is an m-stage contraction operator
in the subspace of uniformly improvable value functions,
but not in the space of all bounded value functions.
The question of whether the dynamic programming operator is, or behaves like, a contraction operator is closely related to the possibility of bounding the suboptimality of solutions found by dynamic programming. We can use Equations 13 and 14 to compute suboptimality bounds only if
we can bound the average number of stages until the terminal state is reached, and we can bound the average number
of stages until the terminal state is reached only if there is
some finite m such that policy execution terminates within
m stages with positive probability. Conversely, the existence of some finite m such that policy execution terminates within m stages with positive probability implies that
we can bound the average number of stages until termination of any policy. But a bound on the number of stages
of policy execution required to reach the terminal state with
positive probability is not also a bound on the average number of stages it takes to reach the terminal state. The second
bound is at least as great as the first, but it is usually greater.
Given that policy execution terminates within m stages
with positive probability, where m is computed as above,
we can describe a simple approach to bounding the average number of stages it takes to reach the terminal state. Let
pt = min{pit (u) > 0 : i ∈ S, u ∈ U } denote the smallest
non-zero probability of a transition into the terminal state t
and let pn = min{pij (u) > 0 : i ∈ S, j ∈ S\t, u ∈ U }
denote the smallest non-zero probability of any other transition. It follows that ρm = pm−1
· pt > 0 is a lower bound
n
on the probability of process termination within m stages.
Thus an upper bound on the expected
∑∞ number of stages until termination is given by m t=0 (1 − ρm )t = m/ρm .
If we set N (i) = m/ρm , ∀i ∈ S, we can use Equations 13 and 14 to compute suboptimality bounds. But almost surely, these bounds will be much too loose to be of
any practical value. Their derivation does show that it is
possible to use the Bellman residual to compute suboptimality bounds, however, and future work may lead to a
more sophisticated approach that computes tighter bounds.
5.2

Implications

Regardless of whether Theorem 6 supports a practical approach to computing suboptimality bounds in the general case, it has some important theoretical implications.
Among them, it points to a stronger convergence proof
for policy iteration than the proofs given by Bertsekas and
Tsitsiklis [3, 4] in the completely observable case, and by
Patek [11] in the partially observable case. Because policy
iteration must start with an initial proper policy, the dynamic programming operator used in the policy improvement step behaves like an m-stage contraction, and thus

standard contraction theory can be invoked to establish uniform convergence. The m-stage contraction behavior also
establishes that policy iteration converges at a geometric
rate. In addition, it establishes that value iteration converges
at a geometric rate when given an initial value function
that is uniformly improvable. By contrast, the convergence
proofs of Bertakas and Tsitsiklis [4] and Patek [11] do not
establish that policy iteration and value iteration converge
at a geometric rate, unless all policies are proper.
The significance of ensuring a geometric rate of convergence is that for any ϵ > 0, it is possible to bound the
number of iterations of value (or policy) iteration needed
to find an ϵ-optimal policy. In the partially observable case,
this result is especially noteworthy. The problem of finding an ϵ-optimal policy for a discounted infinite-horizon
POMDP is well-known to be decidable, by the contraction property of the dynamic programming operator in the
case of discounting. But for undiscounted infinite-horizon
POMDPs, the problem of finding an ϵ-optimal policy has
been shown to be undecidable, in general [7]. However, our
results imply that for an important special case of undiscounted infinite-horizon POMDPs, the partially observable
stochastic shortest path problem, the problem of finding an
ϵ-optimal policy is decidable.
To help make this result seem more plausible, note that
the undecidability of ϵ-approximation for undiscounted
infinite-horizon POMDPs is proved by reduction from the
problem of maximizing the probability of reaching a goal
state, where there is a reward of 1 for reaching the goal
state, a reward of 0 for not reaching the goal state, and the
goal state cannot be reached with probability 1 [7]. Obviously, this problem cannot be reduced to a partially observable stochastic shortest path problem. On the other hand,
the optimization problem for discounted infinite-horizon
POMDPs, which is also undecidable [7], can be reduced to
a partially observable stochastic shortest path problem. But
it does not imply the undecidability of ϵ-approximation,
since ϵ-approximation is decidable for discounted infinitehorizon POMDPs.
Two key assumptions of the stochastic shortest path problem play a role in making ϵ-approximation decidable in the
partially observable case; (i) a proper policy exists, and
(ii) the expected cost of policy execution beginning from
any state from which the terminal state is not reached with
probability 1 is infinite. Combined with our observation
that Jµ ≤ J for any policy µ found by dynamic programming when the initial value function J is uniformly improvable, we have been able to establish the m-stage contraction behavior of the dynamic programming operator in
the space of uniformly improvable value functions. In turn,
it allows use of the Bellman residual of the dynamic programming operator to compute suboptimality bounds.

6

Conclusion

For stochastic shortest path problems, we have shown that
under the condition that the initial value function is uniformly improvable, a greedy policy with respect to any
value function found by value iteration is proper. We have
also shown how to bound the expected number of stages before the terminal state is reached when following a proper
policy found by either value iteration or policy iteration,
which in turn lets us use the Bellman residual of the dynamic programming operator to compute suboptimality
bounds. The key formula used to compute suboptimality
bounds is due to Bertsekas [2]. But it has not been clear
how it could be applied to the case where not all policies
are proper. Our contribution is to show that it can be used to
compute suboptimality bounds even when not all policies
are proper, as long as the initial value function is uniformly
improvable.
In the special case of positive transition costs, especially
when the transition costs are uniform or nearly-uniform,
we showed that useful suboptimality bounds can be easily
computed. In the general case in which transition costs can
be zero or negative, we showed that suboptimality bounds
are possible, but without describing a practical approach to
computing bounds that are tight enough to be useful. We
leave this problem for future work.

[7] O. Madani, S. Hanks, and A. Condon. On the
undecidability of probabilistic planning and related
stochastic optimization problems. Artificial Intelligence, 147:5 – 34, 2003.
[8] M. Maskery, V. Krishnamurthy, and C. O’Regan. Decentralized algorithms for netcentric force protection against antiship missiles. IEEE Transactions
on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, 43(4):1351 –
1372, 2008.
[9] R. Parr and S. Russell. Approximating optimal policies for partially observable stochastic domains. In
Proc. of the 14th Int. Joint Conf. on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-95), pages 1088–1095, 1995.
[10] S. Patek. On terminating Markov decision processes
with a risk averse objective function. Automatica,
37(9):1379–1386, 2001.
[11] S. Patek. Partially observed stochastic shortest path
problems with approximate solution by neurodynamic programming. IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics – Part A: Systems and Humans,
37(5):710–720, 2007.
[12] S. Patek and D. Bertsekas. Stochastic shortest path
games. SIAM Journal of Control and Optimization,
37(3):804–824, 1999.
[13] S. Russell and P. Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A
Modern Approach. Prentice Hall, 3 edition, 2009.

References
[1] A. Barto, S. Bradtke, and S. Singh. Learning to act
using real-time dynamic programming. Artificial Intelligence, 72(1):81–138, 1995.
[2] D. Bertsekas. Dynamic Programming and Optimal
Control, Volume I. Athena Scientific, Belmont, MA,
3rd edition, 2005.
[3] D. Bertsekas and J. Tsitsiklis. Parallel and distributed
computation: Numerical methods. Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1989.
[4] D. Bertsekas and J. Tsitsiklis. Analysis of stochastic
shortest path problems. Mathematics of Operations
Research, 16(3):580–595, 1991.
[5] D. Bertsekas and J. Tsitsiklis. Neuro-Dynamic Programming. Athena Scientific, Belmont, MA, 1996.
[6] B. Bonet and E. Hansen. Heuristic search for planning
under uncertainty. In H. G. R. Dechter and J. Halpern,
editors, Heuristics, Probability and Causality: A Tribute to Judea Pearl, pages 3–22. College Publications,
London, UK, 2010.

[14] T. Smith and R. Simmons. Heuristic search value iteration for POMDPs. In Proceedings of the 20th Conference in Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI04), pages 520–527, Banff, Canada, 2004.
[15] J. Tsitsiklis. Asynchronous stochastic approximation and Q-learning. Machine Learning, 16:185–202,
1994.
[16] N. Zhang and W. Zhang. Speeding up the convergence of value iteration in partially observable
Markov decision processes. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 14:29–51, 2001.

