A Framework for Optimizing Paper Matching

Laurent Charlin
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M5S 3H5
lcharlin@cs.toronto.edu

Richard Zemel
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M5S 3H5
zemel@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
At the heart of many scientific conferences is the
problem of matching submitted papers to suitable reviewers. Arriving at a good assignment is
a major and important challenge for any conference organizer. In this paper we propose a framework to optimize paper-to-reviewer assignments.
Our framework uses suitability scores to measure
pairwise affinity between papers and reviewers.
We show how learning can be used to infer suitability scores from a small set of provided scores,
thereby reducing the burden on reviewers and organizers. We frame the assignment problem as an
integer program and propose several variations
for the paper-to-reviewer matching domain. We
also explore how learning and matching interact.
Experiments on two conference data sets examine the performance of several learning methods
as well as the effectiveness of the matching formulations.

1

Introduction

The assignment of papers to reviewers is one of the most
important tasks facing the organizers of scientific conferences. Assigning submitted papers to their most suitable
reviewers is essential to the success of any conference, indeed to the functioning of many scientific fields, since it
is reviewer assessments that determine the conference program and, to some extent, the shape of a discipline. However, this is not a simple task: large conferences often receive well over 1000 submissions that must be assigned to
many hundreds of reviewers in short amount of time. Apart
from ensuring the suitability of assigned reviewers, constraints imposed by reviewer load limits, conflicts of interest, and other factors push this assignment problem beyond
the reach of a single program chair, and generally prevent
the process from being distributed in a fully satisfactory
way.

Craig Boutilier
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M5S 3H5
cebly@cs.toronto.edu

Many large conferences in computer science (CS), and especially artificial intelligence (AI), allow reviewers to bid
on papers, basically providing their “preferences”—which
we interpret as reflecting a reviewer’s suitability to review particular submitted papers—after which a centralized matching process takes place to find the most suitable
assignment. Preferences collected this way are, unfortunately, inherently noisy for two key reasons: (a) it is difficult for reviewers to offer reasonable assessments of all but
a small fraction of the papers, given the numbers involved;
and (b) reviewers have access to limited information about
each paper (e.g., only title and abstract). The latter factor fundamentally limits how well a reviewer can judge her
own suitability, while the former means reviewers are, in
some sense, semi-randomly choosing papers on which they
express interest.
One response to this problem is to associate simple features
(keywords being most common) with both papers and reviewers, and use some measure of overlap as a reflection
of suitability. Unfortunately, this simple method is crude at
best, and relies on a common understanding of this (usually
limited) vocabulary by all reviewers and authors. A more
sophisticated response involves the use of machine learning
techniques to help predict reviewer expertise [1, 16, 6]. By
using specific features of both reviewers (e.g., previously
written articles, co-authorship relations) and submitted papers (e.g., words or keywords), we can relieve reviewers
of the burden of bidding. Ideally, a combination using this
information as well as self-declared reviewer expertise (or
bids) can be leveraged to predict reviewer suitability using
collaborative filtering methods [10]. Ultimately, however,
the primary goal is not to accurately predict expertise, but
to find a good matching.
In this paper, we propose and test various instantiations of
a flexible framework for optimizing paper matching. We
investigate approaches that use incomplete information in
the form of a limited number of suitability scores: our basic framework predicts missing scores using learning techniques and then finds optimal matchings using both observed and predicted scores. Within this framework, we

explore several learning models which leverage (one or
both of) two sources of information—reviewer/paper features and self-reported suitability—to predict the unknown
scores: these include regression, collaborative filtering and
language modeling methods. We then describe several desirable properties for paper-to-reviewer assignments. We
frame the assignment problem as an integer program [24],
and explore several variations that reflect different desiderata, and how these interact with various learning methods.
We test our framework on two data sets collected from a
large AI conference, measuring predictive accuracy with
respect to both reviewer suitability and matching performance, exploring several different matching objectives and
how they can be traded off against one another.
Although we focus on reviewer matching, our methods are
applicable to any constrained matching domain where: (a)
user preferences for a set of items can be predicted using
user and/or item features; (b) preferences can be used to
improve matching quality; (c) it is infeasible or undesirable for users to express preferences over all items; and
(d) capacity or other constraints limit the min/max number of users-per-item (or vice versa). Examples include facility location, school/college admissions, certain forms of
scheduling and time-tabling, and many others.

2

Related Work

Deep bodies of related work exist for each of the two components that comprise our framework for reviewer matching: prediction of suitabilities or preferences for unobserved reviewer-paper (or user-item) pairs; and computing
matchings given (known or predicted) suitabilities. Past
work has either explored the score prediction problem or
different approaches to matching but, to the best of our
knowledge, ours is the first that examines suitability prediction relative to different matching objectives, and examines
the interactions between learning and matching.
There has been significant research on the use of information retrieval and learning techniques to determine suitability of reviewers for papers. These include the use of latent
semantic indexing [7] or term frequency, inverse document
frequency (TF-IDF) methods [12, 2] that exploit the content of abstracts of papers authored by reviewers and those
of submitted papers. Other have utilized co-authorship
graphs, using the references of a submitted paper as a starting point to generate potential referees [18]. Balog et al.
[1] used language models to determine the suitability of experts for various topics/tasks, and more recently topic models have been applied to the problem of modeling expertise
based on authored documents [25], with Mimno and McCallum [16] applying their topic model to the assessment
of reviewer suitability (we discuss this further below).
While the models above predict suitability using contentbased features of papers and/or reviewers, other methods
exploit elicited suitability scores from reviewers for a sub-

set of papers to make predictions for other papers. This
can be treated as a collaborative filtering (CF) problem.
CF methods leverage known preference information for a
subset of user-item to generate predictions for unobserved
pairs. Recent CF techniques have performed extremely
well in a variety of domains, especially where available
content features are not especially predictive of preference
(or suitability) [21, 22, 15]. Conry et al. [6] applied an
ensemble CF approach, combining side information about
the papers and reviewers with several CF predictors to estimate reviewer suitabilities, and then used a simple matching program to determine assignments based on these suitabilities. This work is closest to ours; however, it does
not explore variants of the matching objective, nor interactions between learning and matching. While CF is typically
framed in terms of preference prediction, recent extensions
instead use CF for optimization w.r.t. a specific target task.
Weimer et al. [26] use CF data for optimization in a ranking task, while Petterson et al. [17] frame ranking as finding
the weights that lead to an optimal matching in a bipartite
graph. Our work has a similar motivation, trying to optimize suitability predictions w.r.t. a matching objective.
A second body of work focuses on the matching problem
itself. Benferhat and Lang [3], Goldsmith and Sloan [11],
and Garg et al. [9] discuss various optimization criteria, and
some of the practices used by program chairs and existing conference management software. Taylor [24] shows
how these criteria can be formulated as an integer program
(IP). Tang et al. [23] propose several extensions to the IP.
This work assumes reviewer suitability for each paper is
known, and deals exclusively with specific matching criteria. There is a rich literature on more general matching
problems in economics and theoretical CS. Examples include the well-known stable marriage problem [8]; resident matching (of residency candidates to hospitals) [19];
and (one-sided) matching in housing markets [13]. In economic models, a key focus is on stability of the matches
and minimizing incentives for participants in the matching
market to misreport their preferences. We do not consider
such strategic issues here.

3

Matching Framework and Instantiations

We begin by outlining our basic problem definition, then
elaborate on several specific instantiations of the framework we develop. These include the use of various learning methods for predicting unknown suitabilities, a range
of objectives and constraints on the matching process reflecting different desiderata for the reviewing process, and
interactions between the two.
3.1

Problem Definition

Our approach to the matching problem relies on suitability scores, which describe the relevance of a reviewer to a
given paper. The matching procedure uses these scores to

form a set of assignments of items to users. For reasons
discussed above, the suitabilities will not be fully specified. Since we do not wish to limit the matching process
to reviewer-paper pairs that are known (i.e., have been directly elicited), these need to be predicted in some fashion.
We formalize the matching problem as follows. Let r ∈
R refer to users or reviewers, p ∈ P to items or papers,
and let |R| = N and |P| = M . Every user-item pair
has a suitability score srp . The set of all scores can be
viewed as a suitability matrix S ∈ RN ×M . Only a subset of
the suitabilities are observed, namely, those collected from
reviewers during an elicitation process. Denote this by S o ,
and denote the observed scores for a particular reviewer r
and paper p by Sro and Spo , respectively. S u , Sru , Spu are the
analogous collections of unobserved scores.
We may have access to additional side information about
individual reviewers and papers which may come in different forms. In our setting, side information about submitted papers could include author-specified keywords, citations, and word usage in the paper. For reviewers, we may
have stated preferences for keywords, citations, or other descriptions of reviewer expertise. Our data sets also include
an archive, containing a set of papers written by each reviewer, providing information about their expertise. This
is represented as a word count vector wr summarizing r’s
own papers. Similarly, we summarize each submitted paper
p as a word count vector wp .
Given this information, our goal is to find a “good” matching of papers to reviewers in the presence of incomplete information about reviewer suitabilities, possibly exploiting
the side information available. The problem can be broken into two main components: predicting unknown suitabilities using some combination of known scores and side
information; and matching papers to reviewers based on
known and predicted suitabilities. Notice that predicting
suitability scores is, however, not a goal in and of itself: it
is subservient to the primary goal of good matching performance. Many different factors may be used to define the
quality of a matching, as we discuss below.
3.2

Learning Methods

We have explored a range of learning methods for predicting suitabilities of reviewers for papers. Here we focus
on three methods, each exploiting the different information
available for prediction: a language model (LM); linear regression (LR); and Bayesian probabilistic matrix factorization (BPMF). LM uses the content of submitted papers and
archived papers for prediction, but does not use reviewer
bids; BPMF uses reported suitabilities/bids, but no document/archive side information; and LR uses bids and the
content submissions, but not the archive.
Language Model: Several previous approaches to reviewer matching have used simple language models to represent distributions over words of papers and reviewers

[25, 16]. Our language model (LM) is based on these, and
predicts suitabilities without using stated reviewer preferences; rather it builds a model in word (feature) space,
assuming that distance in this space correlates with distance in suitability space. LM constructs a distribution over
words for each reviewer, based on the archive of papers
written by the reviewer wr (the reviewer side information).
The starting point for LM is a multinomial Pr(w|d) over
words w in a document d. The maximum likelihood estimate of Pr(w|d) is the number of occurrences of this
word divided by the total number of words in the document (Prml (w|d) = |wd |/Td ). Using Dirichlet smoothing
to account for the fact that most words do not appear in a
given document, this estimate can be written as:
Pr(w|d) =

Td
Prml (w|d) +
Td + µ

µ
Td +µ

Pr(w)

(1)

where Pr(w) is the probability of the word across all documents and µ is the smoothing parameter. This distribution
can be formed in various ways from the user side information (i.e., the collected papers of a reviewer). We adopt
a variant of an approach [16] in which the word vectors
of reviewer-authored papers are averaged to form a single
document dr per reviewer. LM encodes each submitted paper as a word count vector w
Pp , and predicts suitabilities
srp to be log Pr(wp |dr ) =
w∈wp Pr(w|dr ). This language model has outperformed sophisticated topic models
in some settings [16].
Regression: Linear regression (LR) predicts suitabilities
directly using the side information associated with the
items. Each reviewer has a set of parameters θr , which
is applied to item information wp to form an estimate of
srp : ŝrp = θr · wp . Stated reviewer preferences are used as
training observations, and LR minimizes the mean-squared
error (MSE) w.r.t. observed suitabilities:
1 X
CLR (S o ) = o
(ŝrp − srp )2
(2)
|S |
o
srp ∈S

Collaborative Filtering: Given observed suitabilities,
prediction of unobserved suitabilities can be tackled using collaborative filtering. Probabilistic matrix factorization (PMF) [21] is a popular CF method that finds a lowrank factorization of the suitability matrix S ≈ U T V ,
where S ∈ RN ×M , U ∈ RK×N and V ∈ RK×M and
K << min(M, N ). The columns Ur of U and Vp of V
represent latent reviewer and paper factors. The full S matrix, including unobserved suitabilities, can be estimated by
taking the product of U and V . Under this model, the conditional distribution over suitabilities is:
Pr(S|U, V, σ 2 ) =

M Y
N
Y
r

N (srp |UrT Vp , σ 2 )Irp

p

where I is an indicator matrix and entry Irp is 1 if it was
observed and 0 otherwise. Assuming zero-mean Gaussian
priors over the parameters U and V :
2
Pr(U |σU
)=

N
Y
r=1

2
N (Ur |0, σU
);

Pr(V |σV2 ) =

M
Y
p=1

N (Vp |0, σV2 ),

finding the MAP solution involves minimizing MSE between U T V and the known suitabilities.
In a Bayesian version of PMF (BPMF), the parameters U
and V have non-zero mean and full-covariance priors [22].
The predictive distribution cannot be calculated analytically because the posteriors over U and V are intractable,
but a Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampler can be used to
approximate sufficient statistics. Integrating over the parameters has been shown to produce performance advantages w.r.t. root mean squared error (RMSE) on the Netflix
task [22].
Other Methods: In addition to the three methods above,
we investigated several other algorithms, including supervised and unsupervised topic models [4, 5], conditional
restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) [14], and inference using co-reference graphs. Preliminary experiments
showed that these methods did not match the performance
of those above. We also tried leveraging the different
sources of information by using combinations of the various learning models without success. Incorporating each
reviewer’s archive as extra training papers for LR did not
offer any improvement either. Finally, we explored a formulation of the problem in which the training objective explicitly optimizes matchings J(x) rather than optimizing
RMSE w.r.t. predicted suitabilities. However, experiments
with this approach failed to demonstrate improved matching performance.
3.3

Matching Objectives

We articulate several different criteria that may influence
the definition of a “good” matching and explore different
formulations of the optimization problem that can be used
to accommodate these criteria. We also discuss how these
criteria may interact with our learning methods.
Naturally, one would like to assign submitted papers to
their most suitable reviewers; of course, this is almost never
possible since some reviewers will be most suited to far
more papers than others. In general, load balancing is enforced by placing an upper limit or maximum on the number of papers per reviewer. Similarly, we may impose a
minimum to ensure reasonable load equity or load fairness
across reviewers. However, limiting the paper load increases the probability that certain papers will be assigned
to very unsuitable reviewers. This suggests only making assignments involving pairs with score srp above some minimum score threshold. This ensures that every paper is reviewed by a minimally suitable reviewer, but may sacrifice
load equity (indeed, it may sacrifice feasibility). One may
also desire suitability fairness across reviewers; that is, reviewers should have similar score distributions over their
assigned papers (so on average no reviewer is assigned papers to which she is significantly more ill-suited than any
other). Finally, when multiple reviewers are assigned to papers, it may be desirable to assign complementary review-

ers to a paper so as to cover the range of topics spanned by
a submission. Related is the desire to ensure each paper is
reviewed by at least one “senior” reviewer with significant
expertise.
The intricacies of different conferences prevent us from establishing an exhaustive list of matching desiderata (see
[3, 11, 9] for further discussion). We now explore matching
mechanisms that will account for several of these criteria:
we frame the matching procedure as an optimization problem and show how several properties can be formulated as
constraints or modifications of the objective function.
We formulate the basic matching problem as an IP, where
each paper is assigned to its best-suited reviewers [24]:
maximize J basic (x) =

XX
r

srp xrp

(3)

p

subject to xrp ∈ {0, 1}, ∀r, p
X
xrp = Rtarget , ∀p

(4)

r

The binary variable xrp encodes the matching of item p
to user r; a match is an instantiation of these variables.
Rtarget is the desired number of reviewers per paper. Minimum and maximum reviewer load, Pmin and Pmax respectively, can be incorporated as constraints [24]:
X

xrp ≥ Pmin ,

p

X

xrp ≤ Pmax , ∀r.

(5)

p

This IP, including constraints (5), is our basic formulation
(Basic IP). Its solution, the optimal match, maximizes total reviewer suitability given the constraints. Although IPs
can be computationally difficult, our constraint matrix is
totally unimodular, so the linear program (LP) relaxation
(allowing xrp ∈ [0, 1]) does not affect the integrality of the
optimal solution; hence the problem can be solved as an
LP.
Although not mentioned above it is essential for the matching to prevent assignments of reviewers to submitted papers
for which they have conflicts of interest (COI). The above
formulation can easily enforce known COI by directly constraining the conflicting assignments xrp ’s to be 0, alternatively, we can set the relevant scores srp ’s to −∞.
To capture additional matching desirata, we can modify
the objective or the constraints of this IP. Load balancing
can be controlled by manipulating Pmin and Pmax : a small
range ensures each reviewer is assigned the same number
of papers at the expense of match quality, while a larger
range does the converse. We can instead enforce load equity by making the tradeoff explicit in the objective with
“soft constraints” on load:
J balance (x) =

XX
r

p

srp xrp +

X
r

λf

 X



xrp − x̄ (6)

p

where x̄ is the average number of papers per reviewer
(M/N ) and f is a penalty function (e.g., f (x) = |x| or
f (x) = x2 ). The parameter λ controls the tradeoff between load equity and match quality. The J balance objective (Eq. 6) along with the constraints expressed in Eq. 4
comprise our Balance IP.

J tfm (x) =

XX
r

g(srp )xrp .

(7)

p

In this transformed objective J tfm , if g is a logistic function then score are softly “binarized.”
Finally, we note that some of these matching objectives can
also be incorporated into the suitability prediction model.
For example, the nonlinear transformation g can be directly
used in the LR training objective (cf. Eq. 2):
CLR-TFM (S o ) =

X
1
(ŝrp − g(srp ))2 .
o
|S | s ∈S o

(8)

rp

4

Experimental Results

We start by describing the data sets used in our experiments. The rest of the section is divided into three parts.
The first considers score predictions with the different
learning models. The second turns to matching quality
and explores the soft constraints on the number of papers
matched per reviewer. Finally, the third part evaluates a
transformation of the matching objective and shows how
using a transformed learning objective can enhance performance on the transformed matching problem.
4.1

Data

Experiments are run using two data sets, N10 and N09,
from the 2010 and 2009 editions, respectively, of the NIPS
conference, one of the leading conferences in machine
learning.1 For both data sets, side information for each reviewer comprises a self-selected set of papers taken representative of her areas of expertise; these were summarized
as word count vectors wr . Side information about submitted papers consisted of document word counts wp for each
p. The total vocabulary used by submissions (across both
sets) contained over 21,000 words; We used only the top
1000 words for our experiments as ranked using TF-IDF
(|wp | = |wr | = 1000). Reviewer suitability scores ranged
from 0 to 3, with 0 meaning “paper lies outside my expertise;” 1 means “can review if necessary;” 2 means “qualified to review;” and 3 means “very qualified to review.”
As discussed above, these scores are intended to reflect reviewer expertise, not desire. We focus on the area chair
1

See http://nips.cc. We are currently investigating
mechanisms by which we can make both data sets available to
the community.

4

Number of Scores

The J basic objective (Eq. 3) maximizes the overall suitability of the assignments, equating “utility” with suitability. However, the utility of a specific match xrp may not
be linear in suitability srp . For example, utility may be
more “binary”: as long as a paper is assigned to a reviewer
whose suitability is above a certain threshold, then the assignment is good, otherwise it is not. This can be realized
by applying some non-linear transformation g to the scores
in the matching objective (e.g., a matched pair with score
srp ∈ {2, 3} may be greatly preferred to srp ∈ {0, 1}):

3000

3

2500

2.5

2000

2

1500

1.5

1000

1

500

0.5

0

0

1

2

3

0

x 10

0

1

2

3

Figure 1: Observed scores for N10 (a) and N09 (b).
(or meta-reviewer) assignment problem, where the matching task is to assign a single area chair to each paper. We
use the term reviewer below to refer to such area chairs.
N10 comprises 1250 submitted papers to be assigned to 48
reviewers. Suitabilities on a subset of papers were elicited
from reviewers using a rather involved two-stage process.
This process utilized the language model (LM) to estimate
the suitability of each reviewer for each paper, and then
queried each reviewer on the papers on which his estimated
suitability was maximal. The output of the first round
was fine-tuned using a combination of a hybrid discriminative/generative RBM [14] with replicated softmax input
units [20] trained on the initial scores, and LM, which then
determined the second round of queries. In total, each reviewer provided score on an average of 143 queried papers
(excluding one extreme outlier), and each paper received
an average of 3.3 suitability assessments (with a std. dev. of
1.3). The mean suitability score was 1.1376 (std. dev. 1.1);
a histogram of the scores is shown in Figure 1(a). Note
that since the querying process was biased towards asking
about pairs with high predicted suitability, the unobserved
scores are not missing at random, but rather tended toward
pairs with low suitability. We do not distinguish the data
acquired in the two phases of elicitation; both took place
within a short time frame, so we assume suitabilities for
any one reviewer are stable.
N09 comprises 1079 submitted papers and 30 area chairs.
Reviewer scores were not elicited, but instead provided
by the conference program chairs for every reviewersubmission pair. A histogram of the scores is shown in
Figure 1(b). The mean suitability score was 0.19 (std. dev.
0.57).
4.2

Score Predictions

We first analyze performance using the root mean squared
error (RMSE) metric, as is common in collaborative filtering research. We are especially interested in how the
different approaches behave as the size of the training set
increases. An understanding of this dynamic is vital if one
is to strike a balance between the demands of eliciting suitability scores from the user and increased accuracy of predictions.
For learning, we are given a set of training instances,
S tr ≡ S o . We split this set into a training and validation
set. The trained model predicts all unobserved scores S u .

We report results averaged over 5 different splits of the
data in all experiments. In each split, the data is divided
into training, validation and test sets in 60/20/20 proportions. There is no overlap in the test sets across the 5 splits.
When reporting results across splits, we report the mean
and standard error. Training LR is naturally slightly faster
than training BPMF 2 , for which we used 330 MCMC samples including 30 burn-in samples, but both methods are
trained within minutes on both of our data sets.
Fig. 2 shows results for training sets of different sizes,
simulating the effect of additional elicitation. To facilitate comparison, the test set size is fixed across different
training set sizes. We compare LR and BPMF to a baseline which predicts the mean training score. Recall that
BPMF learns to predict S u by using S o only while LR
also utilizes paper features wp . The strong performance
of LR suggests that the information contained in the paper
features is extremely useful in predicting user preferences.
Interestingly, BPMF, a state-of-the-art method in CF, performs worse than LR in all but the extremely small trainingset sizes. Recall that BPMF attempts to exploit similarities across reviewers and across papers. In this case, the
(meta-)reviewers were specifically chosen by the conference organizers to span the field, providing expertise across
the multitude of topics typically represented at this conference. We conjecture that, compared to other popular domains for CF (e.g., movie recommendation), there are far
fewer commonalities across users (w.r.t. paper topics); thus
it is difficult for BPMF to attain very good performance.
Furthermore, although there are probably significant commonalities between papers, each paper receives an average
of fewer than four ratings, which makes it difficult to discover those commonalities from the preference data alone.
Note that the language model is not included here. LM’s
outputs values represent log-probabilities and thus do not
fall into the [0, 3] score range. A linear mapping of the
predicted suitabilities into the score range did not produce
sensible results.
The behavior of the different learning methods on N09 are
similar to that observed for N10. Since they provide no
additional insight, we do not report results here.
4.3

Match Quality

We now turn our attention to the matching framework. We
first elaborate on how we perform the matching. We then
2
We use an implementation of BPMF provided by its authors:
http://www.mit.edu/~rsalakhu/BPMF.html

1.12
1.1
1.08
1.06
Test RMSE

Since we do not have true suitability values for all unobserved scores, we distinguish S u as being the union of test
instances S te (for which we have scores in the data set),
and missing instances S m . We denote a model’s estimates
te
of the test instances
RMSE over these
P as Ŝ te, and evaluate
te 1/2
test instances ( rp∈S te (ŝrp − ste
)/|S
|)
.
rp

1.04
1.02
1
0.98
0.96

LR
BPMF
Baseline

0.94
0

20

40

60

80

100

Training set size per user

Figure 2: Performance on RMSE on the N10 data set as the number of observed suitability scores per user varies.

train/valid.
Matching
Evaluation

tr

S
S tr

test

missing

te

Sm = τ
Sm = τ

Ŝ
S te

Table 1: Overview of the matching/evaluation process.
evaluate the performance of the different learning methods
on the matching objective. Finally we introduce soft constraints into the matching objective and analyze the tradeoffs they introduce.
Matching Experimental Procedures: The matching IPs
discussed above assume access to fully known (or predicted) suitability scores. Since we learn estimates of the
unknown scores, we denote a model’s estimates of the test
instances as Ŝ te , and impute a value for all suitability values that are missing, using a constant imputation of τ ∈ R.
Since missing scores are likely to reflect, on average, lower
suitability than their observed counterparts, we use τ = 1
in all experiments (recall that N10’s mean was 1.1376 and
N09 has no missing scores).
Given the estimate Ŝ te computed by one of our learning
methods, we perform a matching with S = S tr ∪ Ŝ te ∪
(S m = τ ). Note that this permits missing values to be
matched, which is important in the regime of sparse knownsuitability scores. Table 1 summarizes this procedure. For
data set N10 we set Pmin and Pmax to 20 and 30, respectively, while the range is 30–40 for data set N09.
Baseline: We adopt a baseline method that provides an absolute comparison across methods. The baseline has access to S tr and imputes τ for any element of S te . To allow
meaningful comparison to other methods, it employs the
same imputation for missing scores, S m = τ .
A note on LM: Although the output of LM can be directly
used for matching, it does not exploit observed suitabilities
in its usual formulation. However LM can make use of
some of the training data S tr by incorporating submitted
papers assessed as “suitable” by some reviewer r into her
word vector wr . Specifically, we include all papers in wr
for which r offered a score of 3 (only if this score is in S tr ).
For all methods, once an optimal match x∗ is found, we

0

2900

1

2

3

2800
500

Average number of assignments

Matching Objective

2700
2600
2500
2400
LR

2300

BPMF
LM

2200

Baseline

400

300

200

100

2100
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

r

p

Matching Performance using Basic IP: We now report
on the quality of the matchings that result from using the
predictions of the different methods. Again we consider
dynamic matching performance as the amount of training
data per user increases. Note that the optimal match value
is 3053 for N10 and 2172 for N09, which occurs when
Ŝ te = S te .
Figure 3 shows how matching quality varies as the amount
of training data per user increases. Since training scores are
also observed at matching time (Eq. 9), all methods benefit from having a larger training set. Figure 3 leads to the
following three observations. Firstly, when no observed
data is available, i.e., using only the archive, LM does very
well, with a matching score of 2247 ± 32, nearly identical
to the quality of LR and BPMF with 10 bids per user, and
much better than the match quality of 1262 obtained using
constant scores ((S te ∪ S m ) = τ ). Secondly, when very
few scores are available, LR and LM perform best (and do
equally well). As mentioned above, LM is able to exploit
observed suitabilities by adding relevant papers to the user
corpus, but this attenuates the impact of elicited scores: we
see LM is outperformed by all other methods when sufficient data is available. Thirdly, LR outperforms all other
methods as data is added. We also see that as the number of observed scores increases, unsurprisingly, the gain
in matching performance (value of information) from additional scores decreases.
It is also interesting to note that a total matching score of
over 2500 implies that, on average, each reviewer is assigned papers on which her average preference is greater
than 2 (out of 3). LR reaches this level of performance with
less than 30 observed scores per user, while other methods

BP
MF
LR

ne
eli

LM

Ba
s

MF
LR

ne

LM

BP

se
li
Ba

F
LR

BP
M

ne

LM

se
li
Ba

ne
se
li
Ba

evaluate it using all observed and unobserved scores, with
the same constant imputation for the missing scores, where
match quality is measured using J basic (see Equation 3):
XX
x∗rp (S tr ∪ S te ∪ S m = 1)
(9)

LM

0

Figure 3: Performance on the matching task on the N10 data set.

BP
MF
LR

Training set size per user

Figure 4: Assignments for N10 by score value when using 40
training examples per user.

need 30% more data per user to reach the same level of
performance.
Further insight into matching quality on N10 induced by
the different learning methods can be gained by examining the distribution of scores associated with matched papers (Figure 4) or under different sizes of the training set
(Figure 5). Figure 4 displays the number of scores of each
value (0–3) that get assigned with a training set size of 40.
Not surprisingly, LR and BPMF assign significantly more
2s and 3s combined than all other methods. LM is very
good at picking the top scores which reinforces the fact that
word-level features, from reviewer and submitted papers,
contain useful information for matching reviewers. Similar
results were obtained on N09 and thus LM’s performance is
not only a consequence of the data collection method used
for N10. In addition, Baseline assigns few zeros, since all
missing and test scores are imputed to be τ = 1.
Figure 5 provides another perspective on assignment quality. Here we plot results for the best performing method,
LR, on both N10 and N09, for 3 different training set sizes.
We first note that the extreme imbalance in N09 leads LR
to assign many zeros even with 80 training scores per user.
Overall, both data sets show that as the number of training
scores increases, more 2s and 3s, and fewer 0s and 1s, are
assigned.
Our remaining results deal exclusively with N10 since experimental results with N09 were similar.
Load Balancing Balance IP: The experiments above all
constrain the number of papers per reviewer to be within a
specific range (Pmin –Pmax ). There is no good indication
as to how to set these two extrema. Instead we now use the
Balance IP, both for matching and evaluation (see Eq. 9),
setting f to be the absolute value function.
Figure 6 shows the histogram of assigned papers per re-

Avg. number of assignments

0

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

600
500
400
300
200
100

Avg. number of assignments

0

600
500
400
300
200
100
0

Figure 5: Assignments by score value. From Left to Right: 10,
40, 80 (86 examples for N10) training examples per user. Top:
N10. Bottom: N09.

viewer given by the optimal solution to the IP for different λ ∈ {0, 0.1, 1}. When λ = 0 load equity is ignored,
and almost all reviewers either get assigned the minimum
(Rmin ) or the maximum
P (Rmax ) number of papers; withinreviewer variance ( p (xrp − x̄)2 /M ) is extremely high.
When a “soft constraint” on load equity is introduced, assignments become more balanced as the λ increases (i.e.,
the balance constraint becomes “harder”). The following
table reports the matching objective versus the variance, averaged across users, for different values of λ with a training
set size of 40 (other training sizes yielded similar results):
λ
J basic
Variance

0
2625
4.62

0.1
2615
3.28

0.25
2600
2.61

0.5
2573
0.89

0.75
2569
0.37

1
2569
0.33

Not surprisingly, larger penalties λ for deviating from the
mean reviewer load give rise to greater load balance (lower
load variance) and worse matching performance. Generally, an appropriate λ will be chosen by the conference
organizers, that nicely trades off performance versus load
balance across reviewers (here, perhaps around λ = 0.5).
4.4

Transformed Matching and Learning

We now consider a non-linear transformation of the scores,
reflecting the view that it is much better to assign reviewerpaper pairs with suitabilities of 2 and 3, than pairs with 0
and 1; as discussed above this can be accomplished by allowing “utility” xrp to be non-linear in suitability score srp .
We adopt the following sigmoid function to effect this nonlinear transformation: σ(s) = 1/(1 + exp(−(s − 1.5)β));
here 1.5 is the middle of the scores’ range. We set β = 4.5,
which gives: σ(0) = 0.001; σ(1) = 0.095; σ(2) = 0.90;
σ(3) = 1.0. We first show how this transformation impacts
matching performance without learning; then we discuss
how one can incorporate the transformation into the learning objective itself.
We first test how matching using the transformed objectives affects results without using learning to infer missing
scores (consequently, S u = τ ), by examining difference
in matching performance when varying the percentage of

observed scores. Figure 7(a) shows the difference when
matching with the transformed objective (J tfm ) versus the
basic objective (J basic ). In both cases the resulting matches
are evaluated using J tfm . Although a minor gain is observed when most of the known data is observed, there is,
overall, very little difference in performance when matching with either objective. Recall that the mean number of
scores per paper is less than 4. Hence, when matching using a small fraction of the data, the matching procedure
has very little flexibility to assign high scoring pairs unless
learning is used to predict unobserved scores.
We can modify the learning objective to take into account
the nonlinearity introduced in the matching objective. We
do this by transforming all labels using the same sigmoidal
transformation as in the matching objective (Eq.8). This
allows learning to better predict the transformed scores by
explicitly training on them Figure 7(b) shows the transformed matching performance of both LR on the nontransformed data, and LR-TFM, a linear regression model
trained using the transformed learning objective. Not surprisingly, LR-TFM outperforms LR across all training set
sizes, since it is trained for the modified objective J tfm .
The difference is especially pronounced with smaller training sets—when enough data is available, both methods will
naturally assign many 2s and 3s. (We also verified that LRTFM outperforms BPMF trained on the transformed objective).

5

Conclusion

We have developed a framework for paper-to-reviewer assignment in the context of scientific conferences. We
showed how by eliciting only a small subset of scores from
reviewers and inferring unobserved scores, using one of
several learning methods, we are able to determine high
quality matchings. Interestingly, in the field of collaborative filtering, side-information is often perceived to be useful only in the cold-start condition, where few or no scores
are available. The performance of both LM and LR, which
leverage word-level features from reviewers and submitted
papers, show that this is not the case in our domain. We also
explored the trade-off between matching quality and paper
load balancing, which helps one avoid the need to manually set limits on the reviewer load. Finally we showed
that using the realistic assumption that utility is non-linear
in suitability score, we discover better matches using the
same nonlinear transformation in the learning objective.
Given how matching benefits from an interaction with
learning, we are developing ways to strengthen this interaction by making the learning methods sensitive to the final
matching objective. We have obtained good results using
this approach in an active learning setting where the system
chooses which reviewer scores to query. We are also interested in exploring how asking meta-queries, about general aspects of papers rather than a single paper, may be

50
40
30
20
10
0

20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30

20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30

20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30

λ=0

λ = 0.1

λ=1

Figure 6: Histograms of number of papers matched per reviewer with different values of λ. The leftmost plot shows results with only
hard constraints on reviewer loads (λ = 0); the others also include a soft constraint minimizing load variance.
1100

1100

1050

1050

1000

1000

J tfm

J tfm

950
900

950
900

850

850

800
Original Matching

750

LR

800

Transformed Matching

700
0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

LR−TFM

0.9

Fraction of known scores

1

10

20

30

40
50
60
70
Training set size per user

80

90

Figure 7: Performance on the transformed matching objective on N10. (a) Comparing performance of original (J basic ) and transformed
(J tfm ) matching objectives, without learning. (b) Comparing performance of original and transformed LR learning using the transformed
matching objective.

exploited to reduce the number of reviewer queries while
maintaining strong matching performance.

tors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
20 (NIPS), pages 121–128. Vancouver, Canada, 2008.

Acknowledgements: Special thanks to the NIPS Foundation and to the NIPS 2009 program chairs, Chris Williams
and John Lafferty for their assistance in collecting the
N09 data set. Thanks to the reviewers for helpful suggestions. This research was supported by NSERC and CIFAR.

[5] David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, Michael I. Jordan, and John
Lafferty. Latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 3:993–1022, 2003.

References
[1] Krisztian Balog, Leif Azzopardi, and Maarten de Rijke. Formal models for expert finding in enterprise corpora. Proceedings of the 29th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR-06), pages 43–50. Seattle, Washington, USA,
2006.
[2] C. Basu, H. Hirsh, W. Cohen, and C. Nevill-Manning. Recommending papers by mining the web. In Working Notes
of the Workshop on Machine Learning for Information Filtering in the 16th International Joint Artificial Intelligence
Conference (IJCAI-99). Stockholm, Sweden, 1999.
[3] Salem Benferhat and Jérôme Lang. Conference paper assignment. International Journal of Intelligent Systems, 16
(10):1183–1192, 2001.
[4] David Blei and Jon McAuliffe. Supervised topic models.
In J.C. Platt, D. Koller, Y. Singer, and S. Roweis, edi-

[6] Don Conry, Yehuda Koren, and Naren Ramakrishnan. Recommender systems for the conference paper assignment
problem. In Proceedings of the Third ACM Conference on
Recommender Systems (RecSys-09), pages 357–360. New
York, NY, USA, 2009.
[7] Susan T. Dumais and Jakob Nielsen. Automating the assignment of submitted manuscripts to reviewers. In Proceedings
of the Fifteenth Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval
(SIGIR-92), pages 233–244. Copenhagen, Denmark, 1992.
[8] David Gale and Lloyd S. Shapley. College admissions and
the stability of marriage. American Mathematical Monthly,
69(1):9–15, 1962.
[9] Naveen Garg, Telikepalli Kavitha, Amit Kumar, Kurt
Mehlhorn, and Julian Mestre. Assigning papers to referees.
Algorithmica, 58(1):119–136, 2010.
[10] David Goldberg, David Nichols, Brian M. Oki, and Douglas
Terry. Using collaborative filtering to weave an information
tapestry. Communications of the ACM, 35:61–70, December
1992.

[11] Judy Goldsmith and Robert H. Sloan. The AI conference
paper assignment problem. In 22nd National Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-07) Workshop on Preference
Handling in AI, pages 53–57. Vancouver, Canada, 2007.
[12] Seth Hettich and Michael J. Pazzani. Mining for proposal
reviewers: lessons learned at the National Science Foundation. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining (KDD-06), pages 862–871. Philadelphia, PA, USA,
2006.

[23] Wenbin Tang, Jie Tang, and Chenhao Tan. Expertise matching via constraint-based optimization. In IEEE/WIC/ACM
International Conference on Web Intelligence (WI-10) and
Intelligent Agent Technology (IAT-10), volume 1, pages 34–
41. Toronto, Canada, 2010.
[24] Camillo J. Taylor. On the optimal assignment of conference
papers to reviewers. Technical Report MS-CIS-08-30, University of Pennsylvania, 2008.

[13] Aanund Hylland and Richard J. Zeckhauser. The efficient
allocation of individuals to positions. Journal of Political
Economy, 87(2):293–314, 1979.

[25] Xing Wei and W. Bruce Croft. LDA-based document models for ad-hoc retrieval. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR-06), pages 178–
185. Seattle, Washington, USA, 2006.

[14] Hugo Larochelle and Yoshua Bengio. Classification using discriminative restricted Boltzmann machines. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML-08), pages 536–543. Helsinki, Finland,
2008.

[26] Markus Weimer, Alexandros Karatzoglou, Quoc Le, and
Alex Smola. CofiRank - maximum margin matrix factorization for collaborative ranking. In J.C. Platt, D. Koller,
Y. Singer, and S. Roweis, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 20 (NIPS), pages 1593–1600.
Vancouver, Canada, 2008.

[15] Neil D. Lawrence and Raquel Urtasun. Non-linear matrix
factorization with Gaussian processes. In Proceedings of the
26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML-2009), pages 601–608. Montreal, Canada, 2009.
[16] David M. Mimno and Andrew McCallum. Expertise modeling for matching papers with reviewers. In Pavel Berkhin,
Rich Caruana, and Xindong Wu, editors, Proceedings of the
13th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), pages 500–509,
San Jose, CA, USA, 2007.
[17] James Petterson, Tiberio Caetano, Julian McAuley, and Jin
Yu. Exponential family graph matching and ranking. In
Y. Bengio, D. Schuurmans, J. Lafferty, C. K. I. Williams,
and A. Culotta, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 22 (NIPS), pages 1455–1463. Vancouver, Canada, 2009.
[18] Marko A. Rodriguez and Johan Bollen. An algorithm to
determine peer-reviewers. In Proceeding of the 17th ACM
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management
(CIKM-08), pages 319–328, Napa Valley, CA, USA, 2008.
[19] Alvin E. Roth. The evolution of the labor market for medical
interns and residents: A case study in game theory. Journal
of Political Economy, 92(6):991–1016, 1984.
[20] Ruslan Salakhutdinov and Geoffrey Hinton. Replicated softmax: an undirected topic model. In Y. Bengio, D. Schuurmans, J. Lafferty, C. K. I. Williams, and A. Culotta, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
22 (NIPS), pages 1607–1614. Vancouver, Canada, 2009.
[21] Ruslan Salakhutdinov and Andriy Mnih. Probabilistic matrix factorization. In J.C. Platt, D. Koller, Y. Singer, and
S. Roweis, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 20 (NIPS), pages 1257–1264. Vancouver,
Canada, 2008.
[22] Ruslan Salakhutdinov and Andriy Mnih. Bayesian probabilistic matrix factorization using Markov chain Monte
Carlo. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 25, pages 880–887.
Helsinki, Finland, 2008.

