Maximizing the Spread of Cascades Using Network Design

Daniel Sheldon, Bistra Dilkina, Adam N. Elmachtoub, Ryan Finseth, Ashish Sabharwal,
Jon Conrad, Carla Gomes, David Shmoys
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
William Allen, Ole Amundsen, William Vaughan
The Conservation Fund, Arlington, VA

Abstract
We introduce a new optimization framework
to maximize the expected spread of cascades
in networks. Our model allows a rich set of
actions that directly manipulate cascade dynamics by adding nodes or edges to the network. Our motivating application is one in
spatial conservation planning, where a cascade models the dispersal of wild animals
through a fragmented landscape. We propose
a mixed integer programming (MIP) formulation that combines elements from network
design and stochastic optimization. Our approach results in solutions with stochastic optimality guarantees and points to conservation strategies that are fundamentally different from naive approaches.

1

INTRODUCTION

Many natural processes — such as the diffusion of information in a social network or the spread of animals
through a fragmented landscape — can be described as
a network diffusion process or cascade. For example,
an individual who buys a new product or adopts a new
technology may trigger similar behavior in friends; if
this process gains momentum it can cascade through
a significant portion of a social network. The study
of cascading behavior in networks is most familiar in
social or epidemiological settings (Goldenberg et al.,
2001; Leskovec et al., 2007a; Anderson and May, 1992;
Chakrabarti et al., 2008). However, a similar framework called metapopulation modeling exists in ecology
to describe the occupancy pattern of habitat patches
in a fragmented landscape (Hanski, 1999).
One would often like to intervene to steer the course
of a cascade toward some goal, e.g., to maximize its
spread through the network. However, a cascade is
a complex stochastic process and it is typically not

possible to directly control the outcome, but only to
influence certain underlying or initial conditions, such
as where to initiate a cascade. This leaves great uncertainty as to the actual outcome of a given intervention.
In this paper, we contribute a new optimization framework to maximize the expected spread of a cascade
under a very general class of interventions.
The problem of maximizing the spread of a cascade is
of great practical import. In the social network setting,
Domingos and Richardson (2001) posed the problem
of targeting individuals to maximize the effectiveness
of a viral marketing strategy. Kempe, Kleinberg, and
Tardos (2003) later showed that for several different
cascade models, finding the optimal set of k individuals to initiate a cascade in order to maximize its eventual spread is NP-hard, but because it is a submodular
optimization problem, a greedy approach finds approximate solutions with strong performance guarantees.
In a conservation setting, maximizing the spread of a
target species through the landscape given a limited
management budget is a central problem in the newly
emerging field of computational sustainability (Gomes,
2009). In this case, the management tools consist of
augmenting the network of habitat patches through
conservation or land acquisition. Unlike the social network example, the initial locations for the cascade are
predetermined by the current spatial distribution of
the species, which is difficult to manipulate. Moreover, metapopulation models predict that long-term
population dynamics are determined by properties of
the landscape much more so than initial occupancy
(Ovaskainen and Hanski, 2001).
Motivated by these considerations, we introduce a
much more general optimization framework for cascades. In our model, one may choose from a rich set of
management actions to manipulate a cascade: in addition to choosing where to initiate the cascade, actions
may also intervene directly in the network to change
cascade dynamics by adding nodes. This model is general enough to also capture adding edges, or increasing

the local probability of propagating the cascade.
The objective function is no longer submodular with
respect to this more general decision space, so optimization becomes more difficult. We formulate
the problem as mixed integer program (MIP) that
combines elements from deterministic network design
problems and stochastic optimization.
One of our main computational tools is sample average approximation (SAA): we find a solution that is
optimal in hindsight for a number of training cascades
that are simulated in advance. The SAA optimum
may overfit for a small set of training cascades, but
converges to the true optimum with increasing training samples, and provides a stochastic bound on the
optimality gap. Moreover, because the set of training
cascades are known prior to optimization, SAA allows
significant computational savings compared with other
simulation-based optimization methods.
In addition to the MIP-based SAA approach, we contribute a set of preprocessing techniques to reduce
computation time for SAA and other algorithms that
repeatedly reason about a fixed set of training cascades. Our method compresses each training cascade
into a smaller cascade that is identical for reasoning
about the effects of management actions. Our experiments show that running times are greatly reduced by
preprocessing, both for the saa approach and for two
greedy baselines. adapted from Kempe et al. (2003)
and Leskovec et al. (2007b). After preprocessing, our
SAA problem instances are amenable to solution by
branch-and-bound MIP solvers, even though they are
instances of an NP-hard network design problem.
We apply our model to a sustainability problem that
is part of an ongoing collaboration with The Conservation Fund to optimize the conservation of land
to assist in the recovery of the Red-cockaded Woodpecker (RCW), a federally listed rare and endangered
species. Unlike heuristic methods that are often used
in conservation planning, our method directly models
desired conservation outcome. For the RCW problem,
we find solutions with stochastic optimality guarantees
that demonstrate conservation strategies fundamentally different from those found by naive approaches.

2

PROBLEM STATEMENT

We begin by stating the generic optimization problem for progressive cascades; these serve as the foundation for all of our modeling. Specifics of our conservation application — which uses a variant called a
non-progressive cascade — are given in Section 2.3.
A progressive cascade is a stochastic process in a graph
G = (V, E) that begins with an initial set of active

nodes; these proceed to activate new nodes over time
according to local activation rules among neighbors
until no more activations are possible. Given a limited
budget and a set of target nodes, we wish to select from
a set of management actions that affect the activation
dynamics in order to maximize the expected number
of target nodes that become active.
Let A = {1, . . . , L} be a set of management actions,
and let c` be the cost of action `. Let y be a strategy
vector that indicates which actions are to be taken:
y is a 0-1 vector where y` = 1 if and only if action
` is taken. Strategy y results in a particular cascade
process based on the specification of the cascade model
and management actions. Let {Xv (y)}v∈V be random
variables capturing the outcome of a cascade under
strategy y — the variable Xv (y) is 0 or 1 indicating
whether or not v is activated. Let B be the budget,
and let T be a set of target nodes. The formal problem
statement is
max
y

X

E[Xv (y)] s.t.

v∈T

L
X

c` y` ≤ B.

(1)

`=1

In the remainder of this section we discuss the details
of the cascade model and management actions.
2.1

CASCADE MODEL

Our model is the independent cascade model (Goldenberg et al., 2001; Kempe et al., 2003). Consider
a graph G = (V, E) with activation probabilities pvw
for all (v, w) ∈ E. Notationally, we sometimes write
p(v, w) for clarity, and adopt the convention that
pvw = 0 for (v, w) ∈
/ E.
A (progressive) cascade proceeds is a sequence of activations. To begin, each node in a given source set S is
activated. When any node v is first activated, it has a
single chance to activate each neighbor w. It succeeds
with probability pvw independent of the history of the
process so far. If the attempt succeeds and w was not
already active, then w becomes newly activated, and
will have a chance to activate its neighbors in subsequent rounds. If the attempt fails, v will never attempt
to activate w again. Pending activation attempts are
sequenced arbitrarily.
In their proofs, Kempe et al. (2003) argue that the following procedure is an equivalent, albeit impractical,
way of simulating a cascade. For each edge (v, w) ∈ E,
flip a coin with probability pvw to decide whether the
edge is live. Then the set of activated nodes are those
that are reachable from S by live edges. This is tantamount to simulating the cascade, but flipping the coins
for each possible activation attempt in advance. Let
the subgraph G0 consisting of live edges be called the

cascade graph. The SAA method presented in Section
4 will optimize over a fixed set of cascade graphs that
are simulated in advance.
Non-progressive cascades. In a progressive cascade, an activated node remains so forever (even
though it only attempts to activate its neighbors once).
This is appropriate for social settings where a person
adopts a new technology or buys a new product only
once. However, patch occupancy in a metapopulation
is non-progressive: empty habitat patches may become
unoccupied and then occupied again many times, and
occupied patches may colonize others during any time
step, not only upon their first activation. To model
this, suppose that all activations are batched in rounds
corresponding to discrete time steps, and that an active node i has probability βi of becoming inactive
during each time step.
i

pij

i

i

j

1−β

j

j

k

pkj

t=1

k

k

t=2

t=3

Figure 1: Cascade in layered graph
Kempe et al. showed how to reduce a non-progressive
cascade in graph H = (V, E) to a progressive cascade
in the layered graph G = (V T , E 0 ), where nodes are
replicated for each time step, and the nodes at time t
connect only to those at time t + 1 (see Figure 1). Let
vi,t ∈ V T represent the node i ∈ V at time t. The nonprogressive cascade in H is equivalent to a progressive
cascade in G with probabilities:
p(vi,t , vj,t+1 ) = pij ,

p(vi,t , vi,t+1 ) = 1 − βi ,

and p(v, w) = 0 for all other v, w ∈ V T . We think
of this as node i at time t activating itself at time
t + 1 with probability 1 − βi , and failing to do so with
probability βi so that it becomes inactive. (However it
will remain active if it is also activated by a neighbor
in the same time step).
2.2

MANAGEMENT ACTIONS

Management actions in our model consist of predefined
sets of nodes that may be added to the network for a
cost. Consider the problem of augmenting a graph G0
on vertex set V0 to optimize for the spread of cascades.
Let V` be the S
set of nodes
purchased by action `, and

L
let V = V0 ∪
V
be
the
complete set of vertices.
`
`=1
Let G be the corresponding graph on vertex set V ,
and assume that activation probabilities pvw for each
v, w ∈ V are known input parameters.

Given a strategy y, a cascade may proceed through
nodes that are part of the resulting network, either
because they belong to V0 or because some action
was
 purchase the node. Let V (y) = V0 ∪
S taken to
V
be the set of nodes purchased by y, and
`
`:y` =1
let G(y) be the corresponding subgraph of G. The
cascade process is then fully specified by letting Xv (y)
be equal to one if v is reachable by live edges from S
in the subgraph G(y), when each edge (v, w) ∈ E is
chosen to be live independently with probability pvw .
A model that purchases sets of nodes is sufficiently
general to model other interesting management actions
such as the purchase of edges or sources. For example,
to purchase edges, modify the graph as follows: replace edge (v, w) by two edges (v, e) and (e, v), where
e is a new node representing the edge purchase. Let
p0 (v, e) = p(v, w), p0 (e, w) = 1. Then the cascade proceeds from v to w in the new graph with probability
pvw , only if node e is purchased. Similar ideas can
be used to model actions that purchase sources, so
that the submodular influence-maximization problem
of Kempe et al. can be seen as a special case of our
optimization problem.
2.3

CONSERVATION APPLICATION

Here we describe how this model of cascades and management actions relates to metapopulations and a conservation planning problem. A metapopulation model
is a non-progressive cascade that describes the occupancy of different habitat patches over some time horizon T . Node vi,t represents habitat patch i at time t.
For i 6= j, the activation or colonization probability
pij represents the probability that an individual from
patch i will colonize patch j in one time step. The extinction probability βi is the probability that the local
population in patch i will go extinct in one time step.
We assume that colonization and extinction probabilities are specified in advance, although in practice they
are very difficult to know precisely.
Patches are grouped into non-overlapping parcels
P1 , . . . , PL ; some are already conserved, and the others
are available for purchase at time 0. For each unconserved parcel P` , there is a corresponding management
action with node set V` containing the nodes vi,t for
all patches i ∈ P` and for all t. The set V0 consists of
nodes representing patches in parcels that are already
under conservation. In other words, the target species
may only occupy patches that fall within conserved
parcels, and the land manager may choose additional
parcels to purchase for conservation. The fact that
the species may not exist outside of conserved parcels
is a simplification, but there is flexibility in defining
“conserved”, which is adequate for our purposes.

The sources consist of nodes vi,0 such that patch i is
occupied at the beginning of the time horizon. The
target set is T = {vi,T }, i.e., the objective is to maximize the expected number of occupied patches at the
end of the time horizon.
2.4

NON-SUBMODULARITY

Our problem shares the same objective as the submodular influence-maximization problem. However, with
respect to our expanded set of actions, the objective
is not submodular. A set function f is submodular if
for all S ⊆ T and for all m, the following holds:
f (S ∪ {m}) − f (S) ≥ f (T ∪ {m}) − f (T ).
This is a diminishing returns property: for any m, the
marginal gain from adding m to a set T is no more
than the gain of adding m to a subset S of T .
It is easy to see that submodularity does not hold for
the expanded set of actions in our problem, and that
the greedy solution can perform arbitrarily worse than
optimal. This is true because an instance may contain
a high payoff action that is only enabled by first taking
a low payoff action.
1
2

a4

a1

3

s

a3

a2

S
{a1 , a2 }
{a3 }
{a4 }
{a3 , a4 }

f (S)
4
1
0
c+1

c

Figure 2: Example of non-submodularity.
Consider the example in Figure 2, with a single source
node s, unit cost actions, and where activation probabilities are equal to 1 for all edges. Action a4 has
payoff of c, but only if action a3 is also taken. Hence,
the marginal gain of adding a4 to {a3 } is greater than
that of adding a4 to the empty set, so the objective is
not submodular. For a budget of 2, the greedy algorithm will select {a1 , a2 } for a total reward of 4, but
the optimal solution {a3 , a4 } has objective value c + 1.

3

(1) provide bounds in the case of non-uniform sensor
costs and (2) greatly improve performance by introducing the CELF algorithm, which makes the same
selections as a naive greedy algorithm with many fewer
function evaluations by taking advantage of submodularity to avoid unnecessary evaluations.

RELATED WORK

Cascades. Cascade optimization has also been considered by Leskovec et al. (2007b) and Krause et al.
(2008) in their work on optimal sensor placement for
outbreak detection in networks. They seek the optimal
selection of nodes to detect cascades that occur in a
network, and show that this problem is also submodular so can be approximated well by a greedy approach.
They make improvements to the greedy approach to:

Stochastic Optimization. Stochastic optimization
problems have long been considered to be significantly
harder computational problems than their deterministic counterparts. E.g., it is easy to show even in extremely simple settings that certain classes of stochastic linear programs are #P -hard (Dyer and Stougie,
2006). Only in the last two decades has substantial attention been paid to solving stochastic integer programs as well (see, e.g., the survey of Ahmed
(2004)), and the sample average approximation (SAA)
has been instrumental in recent advances. The survey
of Shapiro (2003) outlines the range of convergence results for SAA that can be proved for a wide swath of
stochastic optimization problems. The SAA also yields
surprising strong approximation algorithm results, for
both structured linear and integer programming problems, as surveyed by Swamy and Shmoys (2006). This
approach has recently been applied to other large-scale
stochastic combinatorial optimization problems, such
as was done in the work of Verweij et al. (2003).

4

METHODOLOGY

In this section, we describe our method to solve the
cascade optimization problem (1). A major challenge
is the fact that the objective itself is very difficult to
compute. Even for a fixed strategy y, the problem of
computing E[Xv (y)] for a single node v is equivalent to
the #P -complete s-t reliability problem of computing
the probability that two terminals remain connected
in a graph with random edge failures (Valiant, 1979).
4.1

SAA

The sample average approximation method (Shapiro,
2003; Verweij et al., 2003) is a technique for solving
stochastic optimization problems by sampling from the
underlying distribution to generate a finite number
of scenarios and reducing the stochastic optimization
problem to a deterministic analogue. In our setting,
instead of maximizing the expected value in Problem
(1) directly, the SAA method maximizes the empirical
average over a fixed set of samples from the underlying
probability space. It is important to note that the random variables Xv (y) can be measured in a fixed probability space defined over subgraphs of G that does not
depend on the particular strategy y. In other words, to
simulate a cascade in G(y), one can first flip coins for

all edges in G to construct a subgraph G0 (the cascade
graph), and then compute reachability in G0 (y).
Let G01 , . . . , G0N ⊆ G be a set of training cascades produced in this fashion, and let ξvk (y) be a deterministic
value that indicates whether or not node v is reachable
in G0k (y). The sample average approximation of (1) is
N
L
X
1 XX k
ξv (y) s.t.
max
c` y` ≤ B.
y N
k=1 v∈T

Solve M independent SAA problems of size N
to produce candidate solutions y1 , . . . , P
yM , and
M
1
upper bounds Z̄1 , . . . , Z̄M . Set Z̄ = M
i=1 Z̄i .

2

Choose the best solution y∗ from y1 , . . . , yM by
re-estimating the objective value of each using
Nvalid independent validation cascades.

3

Compute Z(y∗ ) using Ntest independent testing
cascades. The estimated upper bound on the
optimality gap is Z̄ − Z(y∗ ).

(2)

N
1 XX k
xv
max
x,y N
k=1 v∈T
L
X

1

`=1

To encode this as a MIP, we introduce reachability
variables xkv to represent the values ξvk (y), and a set of
linear constraints that enforce consistency among the
x and y variables such that they have the intended
meaning. Let A(v) be the subset of actions that purchase node v. To match our application, we use the
following formulation tailored to non-progressive cascades, for which G0k is guaranteed to be acyclic, though
this is not a fundamental limitation.

s.t.

Algorithm 1: The SAA procedure.
Input: M samples of N training cascades, Nvalid
validation cascades, Ntest testing cascades

routing links (and nodes) that can be purchased to
provide a specified quality of service, and the aim is to
do this at minimum cost. Our formulation is similar
to standard flow-variable based network design MIPs
(e.g., see Magnanti and Wong (1984)), but since the
input graphs are acyclic and purchases are made on
nodes instead of edges, we can utilize a more compact
formulation without any edge variables.

c` y` ≤ B

`=1

xkv ≤

X

y` ,

∀v ∈
/ V0 , ∀k (3)

`∈A(v)

xkv ≤

X

xku ,

∀v ∈
/ S, ∀k (4)

(u,v)∈Ek

0 ≤ xkv ≤ 1, y` ∈ {0, 1}.
Consider a fixed y. We say that node v is purchased if
P
`∈A(v) y` ≥ 1. The constraints (3) and (4) together
imply that xkv > 0 only if there is a path in G0k from
the sources S to v consisting of purchased nodes. In
this case, the constraints are redundant and xku may be
set to the upper bound of 1 for all nodes u on the path.
If there is no path to v, then an inductive argument
shows that xkv must be equal to 0. Otherwise, by (4),
there must be some node u such that xku > 0 and
(u, v) ∈ Ek . By induction, we can build a reverse path
from v comprised of nodes w such that xkw > 0. Such
a path must end at a source (recall that G0k is acyclic),
contradicting the fact that v is not reachable.
Relationship to Network Design. After sampling the
training cascades, our problem is a deterministic network design problem: which sets of nodes should be
purchased to connect the most targets? Network design is one of the most well-studied classes of deterministic combinatorial optimization problems. Traditionally, these problems arise in applications such as
telecommunication networks and supply chains, where
there is a given input graph that specifies potential

Bounding Sub-Optimality of SAA. The SAA
optimum converges to the true optimum of (1) as
N → ∞, but for small N the optimal value may be optimistic, and the solution sub-optimal. Verweij et al.
describe the following methodology to derive stochastic bounds on the quality of the SAA solution compared with the true optimum (Verweij et al., 2003).
Let OPT be the true optimal value of problem (1), and
let Z̄ be the optimal value of the SAA problem (2) for
a fixed set of N training cascades. For any solution
y (typically the SAA optimum), let Z(y) be an estimate of the objective value of solution y for problem
(1) made by simulating Ntest cascades in G(y). The
bounds are based on the fact that
E[Z(y)] ≤ OPT ≤ E[Z̄].
The value E[Z̄ − Z(y)] is then an upper bound on the
optimality gap OPT − E[Z(y)], and the random variable Z̄ − Z(y) is an unbiased estimate of the upper
bound. To reduce the variance, one solves the SAA
problem many times with independent samples and
lets Z̄ be the average of the upper bounds obtained
in this way. This also gives many candidate solutions,
of which the best is selected using validation samples.
The overall procedure is specified in Algorithm 1. Note
that if the SAA problem in line 1 is not solved optimally, the upper bound Z̄i is the best upper found
during optimization, not the objective value of yi .

4.2

PREPROCESSING

Because the SAA problem optimizes over a fixed set
of training cascades that are sampled in advance, it
is possible to achieve significant computational savings by preprocessing the cascades to accelerate later
computations. For example, we defined the training
cascade G0k to be a subgraph of G obtained by retaining each edge (u, v) independently with probability
p(u, v). However, this may be an inefficient representation of a cascade. A more compact representation is
attained by simulating the cascade forward from S so
that nodes and edges that are not reachable under any
strategy are never explored. Such a simulation results
in a graph that is equivalent for computing reachability from S under any strategy y.
In general, during preprocessing of a cascade we will
consider arbitrary transformations of the problem data
for each training cascade — originally consisting of
the tuple (S, T , A, G0k ) — to a more compact representation that preserves computation of the objective for any strategy y. This is done separately for
each training cascade resulting in parameters Sk , Tk ,
and Ak that are now specific to the kth training cascade; the MIP formulation is modified in the obvious way to accommodate this. We first introduce
one generalization: let the reward vector rk replace
the target
set T so that the objective is computed as
P P
(1/N ) k v∈V k rvk xkv . Initially, rvk = 1 for v ∈ T ,
and 0 otherwise. There are two elementary preprocessing steps: pruning and collapsing sources.
Pruning. We exclude any nodes that are not reachable
from S by generating the cascade graph via forward
simulation from S. We additionally prune all nodes v
with no path to T .
Collapsing Sources. If there is a path from S to v
consisting exclusively of nodes from V0 , then v will be
reachable for any strategy y. In this case, v is added
to Sk as a new source. The set S is collapsed to a
single source node s with an outgoing edge (s, v) for
each (u, v) ∈ Ek such that u ∈ S.
We also contribute a method to find sets of nodes that
can be collapsed into singletons because the fates of
all nodes in the set are tied together — i.e, for any
strategy, whenever one node in the group is reachable,
all are. The simplest example of this is a strongly
connected component consisting of nodes purchased
by the same action(s). In general, let u ⇒ v denote
the situation in which, for any strategy y, if node u
is reachable, then node v is also reachable. There are
two basic cases that guarantee that u ⇒ v:
1. (u, v) ∈ E and A(u) ⊆ A(v). I.e., u links to v,
and whenever u is purchased v is also purchased.

2. (v, u) ∈ E and 6 ∃w : (w, u) ∈ E. I.e., the only
link to u comes through v; hence, any path that
reaches v must go through u.
The relation u ⇒ v is clearly transitive, so to find all
pairs such that u ⇔ v, we build a graph with directed
edges corresponding to the two basic cases above and
compute its strongly connected components (SCCs).
Once we have computed the SCCs, we form the quotient graph by collapsing each strongly-connected component C into a single node and updating the edge
set accordingly. We must also update the other parameters of the problem. Let vC be the node corresponding to component C. Then: (i) vC becomes a
source if any node in C was originally a source, (ii)
the reward of vC is equal to the sum of rewards for
the original nodes
T in C, and (iii) the new action set of
vC is A(vC ) = u∈C A(u). To justify (iii), note that
any strategy under which all of C is reachable must
purchase everyT
node in C: the set of actions that does
this is exactly u∈C A(u).
These preprocessing steps may be repeated until no
additional progress is made and we have obtained a reduced cascade. Because preprocessing results in training cascades that are completely equivalent for reasoning about the objective values of strategies, they may
be used in conjunction with any algorithm.
4.3

GREEDY BASELINES

In our experiments, we use two greedy algorithms
adapted from Kempe et al. (2003) and Leskovec et al.
(2007b) as baselines. Each starts with an empty set
of actions, and repeatedly adds the “best” action that
does not violate the budget. The algorithm greedyuc (for uniform cost) chooses the action that results
in the greatest increase in objective value. The algorithm greedy-cb (for cost-benefit) chooses the action
with the highest ratio of increase in objective value to
cost.
In each step, the increase in objective value is evaluated for each possible action by simulating N cascades. For our problem instances, it is prohibitively
time consuming to simulate new cascades for each objective function evaluation. Instead, we reuse a set
of N pre-sampled training cascades as in the SAA
method. Simulations in pre-sampled cascades require
many fewer edge explorations, because only live edges
from the original cascade are considered. We may also
apply our preprocessing techniques in this case. The
incremental nature of the greedy algorithms allow for
an additional optimization: after action ` is selected
in some step, every subsequent strategy will include
action `. Hence we may modify the problem by moving the nodes of V` to V0 so that they become part of

the “original” graph to be augmented, and then repeat
preprocessing. The accumulated speedups from these
optimizations are quite significant: as much as 1000x
in our experiments.

5

EXPERIMENTS

Our application is part of an ongoing collaboration
with The Conservation Fund to optimize land conservation to assist the recovery of the Red-cockaded
Woodpecker (RCW), a federally listed rare and endangered species. RCW are a “keystone species” in
the southeastern US: they excavate tree cavities used
by at least 27 other vertebrate species (USFWS, 2003).
However, habitat degradation has led to severe population declines, and existing populations are highly
fragmented (Conner et al., 2001). As a result, habitat conservation and management are crucial to the
continued viability of RCW.
We use the RCW recovery problem as a test bed for
the computational approaches developed in this work.
The scientific and political issues surrounding endangered species are complex, and great care must be
taken when developing models that predict their fate.
Although we use real data for this study, some parameter choices and assumptions have not been thoroughly verified with respect to RCW ecology. Hence
one should not draw specific conclusions about RCW
conservation planning from the particular results presented here. We stress instead the general applicability
of the computational model to a variety of specific conservation problems: coupled with diffusion parameters
tailored to a given target species, our model can provide decision makers with key information about balancing management options and resource constraints.
"

!"#$%#

Figure 3: The study area. Left: spatial layout of
parcels; dark parcels are conserved. Inset: circles indicate territories; filled circles are occupied. There are
no occupied territories outside the inset area.
The study area for these experiments consists of 443
non-overlapping parcels of land within a coastal area
in the southeastern United States (see Figure 3); each

parcel is at least 125 acres in area (the estimated minimum size to support a RCW territory). The cost to
conserve a new parcel is equal to its assessed property
value, while already-conserved parcels are free.
RCWs live in small groups in a well-defined territory
(i.e., patch) that is centered around a cluster of cavity
trees where the individual birds roost (Letcher et al.,
1998). Presently, the study area contains 63 occupied
RCW territories (these determine the sources S), the
vast majority of which fall within conserved parcels.
We identify almost 2500 potential RCW territories satisfying minimum habitat and area requirements, using a 30 by 30 km habitat suitability raster of the
study area that is calculated using land cover type,
hurricane/climate change risk, and development risk.
The fact that these territories are specified in advance
and assumed to exist at time zero is a simplification,
but compatible with RCW ecology and management
strategies. Because of restrictive requirements for cavity trees (live old-growth pines 80 to 150 years old)
and significant time investments to excavate cavities
(one to six years), the locations of territories are stable over time: it is far more common for an individual
to fill a vacancy in an existing territory than to build
a new one (Letcher et al., 1998). Further, it is a common management practice for land managers to drill
or install artificial cavities to construct a new territory (USFWS, 2003), which is compatible with the assumption that potential territory locations are chosen
in advance of them becoming populated.
The parcel composition can be seen on the left of Figure 3, while the location of active and potential RCW
territories can be seen on the right of Figure 3. Given
a specific budget, the goal is to decide which parcels
to conserve in order to maximize the expected number
of active territories at a 100 year time horizon.
To model the dispersal process among RCW territories, we utilize a simple parametric form for colonization probabilities based on previous theoretical work
about metapopulations, and the parameter values are
adapted to loosely match an individual-based model
for the RCW (Letcher et al., 1998). In particular, the
probability that some individual from an active territory i colonizes an unoccupied territory j in one year
is computed according to Equation 5.
(
1/Ci
d(i, j) ≤ r0
p(i, j) =
(5)
α exp(−γ · d(i, j)) d(i, j) > r0
When the distance d(i, j) between territories i and j is
within the species foraging radius r0 , the colonization
probability is inversely proportional to the number Ci
of neighboring territories within distance r0 . When
d(i, j) > r0 , the colonization probability decays ex-

700

730

600
500
400
saa−ub
saa
greedy−cb
greedy−uc

300
200
0

1

2

3
4
Budget

5

6

greedy−cb
saa−ub
saa

720
710
700
690
680

7
8

670
0

700
Occupied Territories

740

Occupied Territories

Occupied Territories

800

600

500

400

saa−ub
saa
greedy−cb
greedy−uc

300
5

x 10

(a)

10

15

20

1.5

2

N

(b)

2.5
3
Budget

3.5

4
8
x 10

(c)

Figure 4: (a) Objective values for saa and greedy, and saa upper bound, for various budgets. (b) Upper and
lower bounds on objective as a function of training size N. (c) Results for mod instance, K=20.
ponentially with distance. In our study, the foraging
radius is r0 = 3 km, and the other parameter values
are α = 0.1 and γ =7.69e-4. The single-year extinction
probability is βi = 0.29 for all territories i.
5.1

PERFORMANCE AND BOUNDS

We compared the quality of the solutions that the algorithms saa, greedy-uc and greedy-cb found for
our test instance for a range of different budgets. For
the algorithm saa, we solved M = 50 SAA problems
on samples of size N = 10 training cascades using the
CPLEX optimization software, with the best solution
chosen using Nvalid = 500 validation cascades, and finally evaluated using Ntest = 500 test cascades (see
Algorithm 1). The greedy algorithms were run with
100 training cascades and then evaluated using the
same 500 test cascades used for saa. Performance is
measured as the number of occupied territories at the
end of 100 years, averaged over the test cascades.
In Figure 4, we plot performance versus budget for
the three algorithms, and also the stochastic upper
bound (‘saa-ub’) obtained from saa. The saa solutions are very close to this upper bound which indicates that they are essentially optimal. The saa algorithm outperforms both greedy approaches, although
greedy-cb also performs very well in this case. Later
we will see that certain problem instances exhibit a
much bigger performance gap between saa and the
greedy algorithms. Also note that greedy-cb outperforms greedy-uc, which indicates the importance
of considering the benefit of each parcel in conjunction
with its cost.
To test whether the number of training cascades we
used was sufficient, we evaluated the performance as
a function of N at a fixed budget of $398M (10% of
the total parcel cost). Figure 4(b) shows the estimated
upper and lower bounds on the objective obtained for
each training size. Note that the gaps are quite small:

for N = 10 the upper bound is 696.07 and the lower
bound is 687.97, only a 1.16% gap. Moreover, the gap
does not decrease significantly for N > 10, indicating
that N = 10 is a large enough sample size for saa
to obtain high quality solutions. The error bars in
the figure represent 95% confidence intervals that are
computed over the M training samples averaged to
obtain the upper bound, and the Ntest cascades for
the lower bound. These indicate high confidence that
saa is close to the true optimum for the stochastic
optimization problem. Error bars for Figure 4(a) are
of similar size, but are omitted because they are too
small to be seen relative to the scale of the figure.

5.2

PREPROCESSING

Preprocessing is critical to the running time of our
algorithms. Our average training cascade has 44K
nodes after pruning (of 256K possible nodes). The
additional preprocessing steps reduce the average cascade size to under 20K nodes and 43K edges. We
measured the running time savings by solving SAA
instances (T = 20, N = 10) with and without preprocessing (see Figure 5(a)). Running time is typically
reduced by a factor of 3–10 for the range of budgets.
We also evaluated the benefits of preprocessing on the
running time of the greedy algorithms, as illustrated
in Figure 5(b). The lines are labeled as follows: ‘fresh’
is the variant of the greedy algorithm that evaluates
the marginal benefit of each action by simulating a
fresh set of training cascades each time; ‘reuse’ is the
variant where training cascades are simulated in advance as in SAA; ‘reuse+pre’ also includes preprocessing of the training cascades; and ‘reuse+pre+repeat’
reapplies the preprocessing step each time the greedy
algorithm commits to a management action. The results indicate the dramatic runtime savings accrued
by: (1) generating training cascades in advance and
(2) preprocessing cascades to reduce their size.

30

saa
saa+pre

Runing Time (seconds)

25
20
15
10
5
0
0

2

4
Budget

6

8
8

x 10

(a)
4000

Runing Time (seconds)

3500
3000
2500

fresh
reuse
reuse+pre
reuse+pre+repeat

2000
1500
1000
500
0
0

2

4
Budget

6

8
8
x 10

(b)
Figure 5: Run times with different levels of preprocessing: (a) saa, (b) greedy-uc.

6

this is not the case. We have modified the problem
instance to demonstrate this point, by taking many
of the parcels in the northeast quadrant out of conservation and assigning them costs, and then making
many of the parcels farther to the west and southwest
conserved (i.e., available at no cost). This reflects a
situation where an existing population is located at
some distance from a reservoir of conservation land
that is suitable for habitation, or could be made suitable by low-cost management strategies. All other details of the problem such as colonization probabilities
and time horizon remain the same.
In Figure 4(c), we evaluate performance of saa,
greedy-cb and greedy-ub across different budgets
for the modified instance. In this case, unlike in Figure
4(a), there is a substantial performance gap between
saa and both greedy approaches.
Figure 6 illustrates the actual strategies of greedy-cb
and saa on this modified instance. We can see qualitatively different strategies between the two. In this
case, greedy-cb continues to follow the myopic conservation strategy of building outward from the initial
population, while saa recognizes that there is a high
available payoff by connecting to existing conservation
land and builds a path in that direction.

DISCUSSION

In Section 2.4, we presented an example that showed
that the greedy algorithm can perform arbitrarily
worse than optimal. However, in Figure 4(a), greedycb is often competitive with saa. Upon investigation,
we found that our study area is very well suited to a
myopic strategy such as greedy. The diffusion behavior
of the RCW given by Equation (5) is such that short
range colonizations with hops smaller than the foraging radius r0 are much more common than long range
colonizations. Hence, any good solution is effectively
constrained to buy parcels that are contiguous with the
initially occupied territories, so new parcels can be colonized by short hops. However, the greedy algorithms
build outwards myopically, never caring what lies beyond the current parcel they are purchasing, while the
saa algorithm is capable of setting goals, e.g., to build
a path from the sources to another area that is highly
favorable. However, one can see from Figure 3 that
the most favorable area is actually very close to the
sources: there is a large block of conserved, but unoccupied, territories in the northeast quadrant of the
study area that can support an increased population at
no additional cost if they are connected to the sources.
Hence, due to the proximity, the greedy algorithm easily discovers a near-optimal solution even though it is
behaving myopically.
It is easy to imagine real conservation scenarios where

7

CONCLUSION

In this work, we addressed the problem of maximizing
the spread of cascades under budget restrictions. Our
problem formulation allows a powerful class of management actions that add nodes to the network. However, the cascade is a complex stochastic process so
the outcome of any particular action is uncertain, and
unlike other cascade optimization problems, this one
cannot be provably approximated by a naive greedy
approach. We proposed a sample average approximation approach to reduce the stochastic problem to a
deterministic network design problem, while still retaining stochastic optimality guarantees. We evaluated our methodology on a key problem from the field
of computational sustainability: spatial conservation
planning for species population growth. The SAA approach scaled well to this large real-world instance and
found better solutions than greedy baselines while also
providing optimality bounds. Moreover, preprocessing techniques resulted in a dramatic runtime speedup
for both the SAA and greedy algorithms. Most importantly, our results show that the optimal solutions
generated by the SAA approach can be qualitatively
different than the ones obtained by a myopic greedy
approach. A promising avenue of future research is to
evaluate this methodology for other conservation and
cascade optimization problems.

$ 150M

$ 260M

$ 320M

$ 400M

Figure 6: Illustration of conservation strategies for different budget levels obtained by greedy (top row) and
saa (bottom row). The expected number of active territories is given for each solution.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science
Foundation (grants IIS-0832782, IIS-0514429, and
DBI-0905885) and the Air Force Office of Scientific
Research (grant FA9550-04-1-0151).

References
Ahmed, S. (2004). Introduction to stochastic integer programming. COSP Stochastic Programming Introduction
– http: // stoprog. org .
Anderson, R. and May, R. (1992). Infectious diseases of
humans: dynamics and control. Oxford University Press.
Chakrabarti, D., Wang, Y., Wang, C., Leskovec, J., and
Faloutsos, C. (2008). Epidemic thresholds in real networks. ACM Transactions on Information and System
Security (TISSEC), 10(4):1.
Conner, R., Rudolph, D., Walters, J., and James, F.
(2001). The Red-cockaded Woodpecker: surviving in a
fire-maintained ecosystem. Univ of Texas Press.
Domingos, P. and Richardson, M. (2001). Mining the network value of customers. In KDD, pages 57–66.
Dyer, M. and Stougie, L. (2006). Computational complexity of stochastic programming problems. Mathematical
Programming, 106(3):423–432.
Goldenberg, J., Libai, B., and Muller, E. (2001). Talk of
the network: A complex systems look at the underlying
process of word-of-mouth. Marketing Letters, 12(3):211–
223.
Gomes, C. P. (Winter 2009). Computational Sustainability: Computational methods for a sustainable environment, economy, and society. The Bridge, National
Academy of Engineering, 39(4).
Hanski, I. (1999). Metapopulation ecology. Oxford University Press, USA.
Kempe, D., Kleinberg, J., and Tardos, É. (2003). Maximizing the spread of influence through a social network.
In KDD, pages 137–146.

Krause, A., Leskovec, J., Guestrin, C., VanBriesen, J., and
Faloutsos, C. (2008). Efficient sensor placement optimization for securing large water distribution networks.
Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management,
134:516–526.
Leskovec, J., Adamic, L., and Huberman, B. (2007a). The
dynamics of viral marketing. ACM Transactions on the
Web (TWEB), 1(1):5.
Leskovec, J., Krause, A., Guestrin, C., Faloutsos, C., VanBriesen, J., and Glance, N. (2007b). Cost-effective outbreak detection in networks. In KDD, pages 420–429.
Letcher, B. H., Priddy, J. A., Walters, J. R., and Crowder,
L. B. (1998). An individual-based, spatially-explicit simulation model of the population dynamics of the endangered red-cockaded woodpecker, picoides borealis. Biological Conservation, 86(1):1 – 14.
Magnanti, T. and Wong, R. (1984). Network design and
transportation planning: Models and algorithms. Transportation Science, 18(1):1.
Ovaskainen, O. and Hanski, I. (2001). Spatially structured
metapopulation models: global and local assessment of
metapopulation capacity. Theoretical Population Biology, 60(4):281–302.
Shapiro, A. (2003). Monte Carlo sampling methods. In
Ruszczynski, A. and Shapiro, A., editors, Stochastic Programming, Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science Vol. 10, pages 353–426.
Swamy, C. and Shmoys, D. (2006). Approximation algorithms for 2-stage stochastic optimization problems. In
Proceedings of FSTTCS, pages 5–19.
USFWS (2003). Red-cockaded woodpecker recovery plan.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Atlanta, GA.
Valiant, L. G. (1979). The complexity of enumeration
and reliability problems. SIAM Journal on Computing,
8(3):410–421.
Verweij, B., Ahmed, S., Kleywegt, A., Nemhauser, G., and
Shapiro, A. (2003). The sample average approximation
method applied to stochastic routing problems: a computational study. Computational Optimization and Applications, 24(2):289–333.

