Dynamic programming in influence diagrams with decision circuits

Ross D. Shachter
Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
shachter@stanford.edu

Abstract
Decision circuits perform efficient evaluation
of influence diagrams, building on the advances in arithmetic circuits for belief network inference [Darwiche, 2003; Bhattacharjya and Shachter, 2007]. We show how even
more compact decision circuits can be constructed for dynamic programming in influence diagrams with separable value functions
and conditionally independent subproblems.
Once a decision circuit has been constructed
based on the diagram’s “global” graphical
structure, it can be compiled to exploit “local” structure for efficient evaluation and sensitivity analysis.

1

INTRODUCTION

Influence diagrams [Howard and Matheson, 1984] are
popular graphical models for representing, evaluating
and analyzing a single rational decision maker’s decision problem. We can exploit any separable value
functions in influence diagrams for more efficient evaluation [Tatman and Shachter, 1990; Luque and Diez,
2009]. Decision circuits are graphical representations
for efficient evaluation and sensitivity analysis on influence diagrams with a single value node [Bhattacharjya and Shachter, 2007, 2008, 2010]. In this paper, we
show how they can be applied to influence diagrams
with multiple value functions using join tree methods
[Shachter and Peot, 1992; Dittmer and Jensen, 1994].
Arithmetic circuits [Darwiche, 2003] are graphical representations for probabilistic inference and sensitivity
analysis in Bayesian belief networks. Decision circuits
are a natural extension to arithmetic circuits for evaluating sequential decision problems represented as influence diagrams.
Global structure refers to the topology of the graph,

Debarun Bhattacharjya
Business Analytics and Math Sciences
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
debarunb@us.ibm.com

the size and the treewidth for a given task. Techniques
have been developed to exploit global structure in the
construction of arithmetic circuits applying logic [Darwiche, 2002; Chavira and Darwiche, 2005; Chavira,
2007] and join trees [Park and Darwiche, 2004]. We
apply join tree methods, as well, but the arithmetic circuit approaches do not deal with the additional vertex
elimination order restrictions in decision problems and
complex accounting for separable value functions. To
address these issues, we introduce a “branching operator” for decision circuits, use directed chordal graphs
to develop our join tree structure, and introduce decision circuit backbones as a compact representation for
symmetric decision circuits.
Local structure in belief networks refers to the specific
numbers, particularly zeros, in the conditional probability tables (CPTs). Like arithmetic circuits, decision
circuits are compiled so that subsequent evaluation
and analysis can be more efficient. This is particularly useful for real-time decision making.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we
review influence diagrams and introduce some examples. In Section 3 we review decision circuits, and
introduce a new type of decision circuit operator for
branching. In Section 4 we show how to construct a
decision circuit for an influence diagram with multiple
value nodes, based on directed chordal graphs and introducing an intermediate structure we call a “decision
circuit backbone.” In Section 5 we discuss methods to
compile the decision circuit, taking advantage of local
structure. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 6
with some suggestions for future research.

2

INFLUENCE DIAGRAMS

In this section we review influence diagrams and introduce the notation and two examples that we will refer
to throughout the paper.
An influence diagram is a directed acyclic graphical

model. The nodes correspond to the variables, uncertainties drawn as ovals, decisions drawn as rectangles,
and values drawn as rounded rectangles. We denote
variables by upper-case letters (X) and their possible
states by lower-case letters (x). A bold-faced letter
(U) indicates a set of variables. We refer interchangeably to a node and its corresponding variable, referring to them simply as uncertainties, decisions, and
values. If X is a node with parents U, then XU is
called the family of X. The parents of an uncertain
or value node condition its probability distribution or
expected value, while the parents of a decision node
will be observed before the decision will be made.
Consider the influence diagram shown in Figure 1a
from Dittmer and Jensen [1997]. There are three decisions, D1, D2, and D3, one value, V , and four uncertainties, A, B, C, and E. The distribution for B is
unconditional, while all of the other distributions are
conditional. No other variables will be observed before
decision D1 is made, but when D3 is made D1, C, D2,
E, and A will have been observed.
Uncertain descendants of decisions are said to be responsive because their outcome can be affected by the
decisions. The only non-responsive uncertainty is B,
and thus it is the only uncertainty which could be observed in advance [Heckerman and Shachter, 1995].
Such evidence can incorporate any data already collected or determine the value of clairvoyance. We also
allow evidence to indicate which alternatives are available and which value variables are to be accumulated.
We assume that value nodes have no children and that
when there are multiple values the total value is their
sum [Tatman and Shachter, 1990]. (The methods in
this paper could also be applied to multilinear value
models with nested sums and products.) Consider the
influence diagram shown in Figure 2a from Jensen et
al [1994]. There are four decisions in this example
and four values, and the decisions are made so as to
maximize the sum of the values. There are three nonresponsive uncertainties, A, B, and C.
In addition to the structure of the influence diagram,
we need the possible states for each of the uncertainties and the decisions. For each uncertainty X
with parents U there is a distribution θx|u = P {X =
x|U = u}. For each value V with parents U, we treat
v as a placeholder in θv|u = E{V |U = u}, which we
assume is positive without any loss of generality. (As
a result, if one of the alternatives for a decision is unavailable it will yield zero value and be dominated by
any available alternative.)
We allow evidence e about uncertain variables E, and
augmented evidence e0 , which also includes the value
distributions, {θx|u }, and any evidence about values

and decisions. For any uncertainty or decision X, λx =
0 if we assert that X 6= x and λx = 1 otherwise. In the
case of value variable V , we allow any λv ≥ 0 to weight
or discount its contribution, with λv = 0 if we want to
ignore the value variable V in making our decisions.
We can recognize which of the available observations
are requisite for each of the decisions. In the example
shown in Figure 1a, even though D1, C, D2, E, and A
are all known at the time of decision D3, A is sufficient
to make the best decision. This can be determined for
each decision, in reverse order, by finding the observations relevant to the value descendants of the decision
[Shachter, 1998, 1999].
We assume that the influence diagram is a single component. If not, the problem can be solved separately
for each component. We also assume that there are no
nodes in the diagram which could be simply removed.
For example, some non-responsive uncertainties might
become relevant if they were observed.
For each of the diagrams, a moral graph, similar to the
ones in Shachter [1999], is shown in Figures 1b and
2b. Moral graphs are obtained by including only the
requisite observations as parents of the decisions and
adding undirected edges (as dashed lines), if necessary,
between any two nodes with a common child. These
extra edges will ensure that each node’s family can be
represented in the constructed decision circuit, so that
the distribution can be incorporated.
The standard exact approaches to evaluating influence
diagrams incorporate an implicit or explicit variable
elimination order. If requisite observations for a decision precede the decision while responsive uncertain
and value variables follow it in the order, the order is
said to be consistent with the influence diagram. In
section 4 we will construct a decision circuit based on
any given target variable elimination order consistent
with the influence diagram.

3

DECISION CIRCUITS

Decision circuits are modified arithmetic circuits [Darwiche, 2003] for efficient evaluation and analysis of influence diagrams. In particular, they have a maximization operator in addition to sum and product operators [Bhattacharjya and Shachter, 2007], and they perform evaluation with an upward sweep through the circuit and differentiation with a subsequent downward
sweep. In this paper, we also introduce a branching
operator to deal with conditionally independent subproblems and additive value functions. The branching operator requires that we evaluate two functions
simultaneously as we sweep upward through the decision circuit, one for the expected value weighted by the

B

A

B

a)

A

B

b)
C

E

D1

V

D2

D3

A

c)
C

D1

E

V

D2

C

D3

E

D1

V

D2

D3

Figure 1: Original influence diagram, moral graph, and directed chordal graph for the Dittmer and Jensen [1997] example
with elimination order D1, C, D2, E, A, B, D3, V.
a) A

b) A

D4
C

B

G
E

D
D1

L
I

D2
F

G

V3

L

E
D

K
D3

B

J
H

V1

C
V2

c) A

D4

D1

I
D2

F

B

J

V1
V4

C
V2

H

G
E

D
V3

D1

K
D3

D4
L
I
D2
F

J
H

V1
V4

V2

V3
K

D3

V4

Figure 2: Original influence diagram, moral graph, and directed chordal graph for the Jensen et al [1994] example with
elimination order B, D1, D, C, A, E, D2, G, D4, I, L, F, D3, H, K, J, V1, V2, V3, V4.

probability of the evidence and another with only the
probability of the evidence. On the downward pass,
we need to evaluate three sets of partial derivatives.
A sequential decision problem can be represented as
a dynamic programming function g(e0 ) computing the
maximal expected value weighted by the probability
of the evidence about any of the variables, including
the value variables. Similarly, we can represent the
probability of the evidence as g(e), where evidence e is
the evidence about just the uncertain variables, so the
maximal expected value is given by g(e0 )/g(e). The
function g(e0 ) is our objective for making decisions and
g(e) normalizes it to units of expected value.
We derive in the next section the functions below for
the influence diagram shown in Figure 1a:
P
P
P P
g(e) =
c λc θc|d1
e λe θe|c,d2
a
b λa θa|b,e λb θb
P
P
0
g(e ) = maxd1 λd1 c λc θc|d1 maxd2 λd2 e λe θe|c,d2
P P
a[
b λa θa|b,e λb θb ][maxd3 λd3 λv θv|a,d3 ].
A decision circuit is a graphical representation of a dynamic programming function. It is a directed acyclic
graph with leaves 0, 1, {θx|u }, and {λx }. The non-leaf
nodes are operators, sum, product, max, and branching, on the node’s children. There is a single root node,
corresponding to our functions, g(e0 ) and g(e). The
size of a decision circuit is the number of arcs it contains. We have not displayed the decision circuit for
the diagram in Figure 1a because it is too large. Even

if each variable had only two possibilities, the circuit
would have 122 nodes and 138 arcs. Although a decision circuit is an efficient representation for analyzing
the problem, it is not well suited for communication,
and therefore we introduce decision circuit backbones
in the next section as a more compact and readable
intermediate representation.
The decision circuit is not a tree, because nodes can
have multiple parents to exploit conditional independence [Darwiche, 2000]. For example, in the computation of g above, c and d2 play no role after θe|c,d2
is introduced, and the rest of the expression can be
computed for any possible (c, d2). This would be implemented in a decision circuit by having all possible
(c, d2) as parents of the A sum node for a particular
e, an example of coalescence, discussed in Section 5.
The functions g(e) and g(e0 ) are computed together by
evaluating the circuit in an upward pass, starting just
above the leaves and ending at the root, only visiting
a node after all of its (non-leaf) children have been
visited and then performing the node’s operation. For
each intermediate node x there are two values, gx (ex )
and gx (e0 x ), where ex represents the evidence in the
leaves below x. For each of the functions, the value of a
sum node is the sum of the corresponding values of its
children. The value of a product node is their product,
although to compute gx (ex ) we ignore any λd , λv , and
θv|u children. (The lists of which children contribute
to both gx (ex ) and gx (e0 x ) and which contribute only

to gx (e0 x ) can be created at compile time.)
The gx (e0 x ) value of a max node x is the largest corresponding value of its children, remembering which
child y yielded the maximum, and breaking ties arbitrarily. The gx (ex ) value of a max node x can be taken
from any of its children when e includes only nonresponsive evidence, since they should all be equal,
and we therefore suggest using gy (ey ).
3.1

A New Branching Operator

We add a branching node to the decision circuit to
combine conditionally independent subproblems with
their own additive value functions and disjoint evidence. The branching node x works differently for the
two functions: gx (ex ) = g1 (e1 )g2 (e2 ) and gx (e0 x ) =
g1 (e0 1 )g2 (e2 ) + g1 (e1 )g2 (e0 2 ), the cross-product of the
two child branches [Shachter and Peot, 1992; Dittmer
and Jensen, 1994]. This distinction is necessary to normalize the different values of gi (e0 ) before summing, so
that the combined gx (e0 x ) function incorporates all evidence from both branch 1 and branch 2. (This can be
generalized to more than two branches, but it is more
efficient to create a binary tree of branching nodes.)
The partial derivatives of g(e) and g(e0 ) can then be
computed by differentiating the circuit in a downward
pass, starting at the root node and ending at the leaves,
only visiting a node after all of its parents have been
visited. For each node x there are three partial deriva0
∂g(e0 )
)
, ∂g
, and ∂g∂g(e
. There are three
tives: ∂g∂g(e)
0
x (ex )
x (ex )
x (e x )
derivatives because g(e) can be computed solely from
the local probability functions as in an arithmetic circuit, but we use both local functions to compute g(e0 )
with the branching operator.
For the downward differentiation pass, because the
root is not a branching node we can initialize the root
0
∂g(e)
)
∂g(e0 )
derivatives to ∂g(e)
= 1, ∂g(e
∂g(e) = 0, and ∂g(e0 ) = 1.
Each of the derivatives at all other nodes are sums
over their parents, applying the chain rule. Each
child of a sum node inherits its parent’s corresponding derivatives; each child of a product node inherits its parent’s corresponding derivatives multiplied by
its siblings’ corresponding values; and the maximizing
child of a max node inherits its parent’s corresponding derivatives. The first child of a branching node x
∂g(e0 )
inherits g2 (e2 ) ∂g∂g(e)
toward ∂g∂g(e)
, g2 (e2 ) ∂g
+
x (ex )
1 (ex )
x (ex )
0

)
g2 (e0 2 ) ∂g∂g(e
toward
0
x (e x )
0

∂g(e0 )
∂g1 (ex ) ,

0

)
and g2 (e2 ) ∂g∂g(e
to0
x (e x )

)
ward ∂g∂g(e
, with symmetric expressions for the sec0
1 (e x )
ond child.

The upward and downward passes are also referred to
as sweeps. Thus we can evaluate the decision problem
with one sweep and compute all of the derivatives with

another. Consequently the time complexity for these
operations is linear in the size of the circuit.

4

BUILDING DECISION CIRCUITS
FROM INFLUENCE DIAGRAMS

In this section we show how to build a decision circuit
that exploits the global structure of an influence diagram, given a target variable elimination order. After
constructing a directed chordal graph from the moral
graph using the target order, we build a “decision circuit backbone” to specify the decision circuit.
4.1

Directed chordal graphs

The theory of chordal graphs and junction trees is well
developed and we build on these results [Golumbic,
1980; Tarjan and Yannakakis, 1984; Shachter et al,
1990]. We define an acyclic directed graph to be
chordal if there is an arc between any two nodes with
a common child. A directed chordal graph can always be obtained from an undirected chordal graph
by directing its edges according to one of its “perfect”
orderings, and the undirected graph corresponding to
a directed chordal graph is always chordal.
A particularly useful result is that given a total ordering there is a unique minimal directed chordal graph,
based on the minimal chordal graph fill-in procedure
applied to the moral graph. The directed chordal
graph is said to be consistent with the original influence diagram if the value nodes have no children, and
the parents of each decision node include all of the requisite observations and only nodes observed before the
decision is made [Nielsen and Jensen, 1999; Shachter,
1999]. When the target order is consistent with the
original influence diagram, the fill-in procedure is guaranteed to produce a consistent directed chordal graph.
Proposition 1 (Minimal Directed Chordal Graph).
Given any influence diagram and a consistent target
order, there is a unique minimal directed chordal graph
consistent with the order. To construct it from the
moral graph, use the order to direct all edges, and visiting each node in reverse order, add a directed arc, if
necessary, between each pair of its parents.
In Figures 1c and 2c we show directed chordal graphs
based on the consistent target orders given in the captions. We want to create a tree structure, similar to
a junction tree, for the decision circuit backbone, and
we use the longest paths in the chordal graphs, comprising the bolded arcs. We can do this based on the
following result.
Theorem 1 (Directed Chordal Graph Properties).
Given a single component directed chordal graph, there
is exactly one root node.

There is exactly one longest path to each node X from
the root and that path contains all of X’s ancestors.

max D1
* D1 | D1
+ C | D1
* C | C, D1
max D2 | C
* D2 | D2, C
+ E | C, D2
* E | E, C, D2
+A|E

The arcs on the longest paths form a tree and all of
the children of any node X are contiguous with X in
the tree.
Proof. There is a path containing all of the ancestors
of any node X, or two of its ancestors would have a
common child but not an arc between them and the
graph would not be chordal. That path is the longest
path to X. There can be only one root node in the
graph because each non-root node has exactly one root
ancestor. The longest paths form a tree because the
ancestors of each node are totally ordered. Finally, if
any node X is a parent of Y , the node preceding Y in
the longest path is either X or a child of X, because X
and that node are both parents of Y in a chordal graph.
(This is equivalent to the “join tree property”.)
4.2

Decision circuit backbones

A decision circuit backbone is a compact representation for a decision circuit showing the branching as
well as sum, product, and max operators. It is compact because it represents a generic path through a
symmetric decision circuit. At any time in the construction process, there is a set of variables W which
have been introduced and are still available, and for
each w there is a corresponding operator node in the
decision circuit. An uncertainty X is introduced via
“+X|W”, representing a sum over x for each possible
w. Similarly, a decision variable X is introduced via
“max X|W”, representing a max over x for each possible w. On the other hand, no variable is introduced
via “∗X|W”, representing a product with θx|u and λx
over x for each possible w, and it is necessary that the
entire family of X, including X, be contained within
W. Branches in the circuit represent conditionally independent sub-models to be combined, each with its
own contribution to the total value.
To construct a decision circuit backbone from a directed chordal graph:
1. use the structure of the longest path tree, branching when the tree branches, and adding entries for
each node in the chordal graph:
• for uncertainty X with parents W in the
chordal graph, enter “+X|W”;
• for decision X with parents W, enter
“max X|W”, followed by “∗X|W”; and
• for value V with parents W, enter “∗V |W”,
and for any terminal branch that doesn’t end
with a value, append “∗ zero value”

+ B | A, E
* A, B | A, B, E
*zero value

max D3 | A
* D3 | D3, A
* V | A, D3

Figure 3: Branching decision circuit backbone for the influence diagram and target order shown in Figure 1.

2. for each chance node X, find an entry in the backbone where W contains the node’s family and insert “∗X|W” below it. (The moralizing step guaranteed that there will be at least one such entry,
and, as a heuristic, we suggest the highest such
entry in the backbone.)
The decision circuit backbone corresponding to the
chordal graph in Figure 1c is shown in Figure 3, and
the backbone corresponding to the chordal graph in
Figure 2c is shown in Figure 4. Note that product entries for multiple uncertainties can be combined into
one entry, such as “∗A, B|A, B, E” in Figure 3.
4.3

Constructing the decision circuit

In this section we construct the decision circuit from
the decision circuit backbone. The backbone organizes
all of the information needed for the process.
We describe the construction of the decision circuit
starting at the root node with W = {}. During the
process there will be an operator node created for each
possible w. The sum entry “+X|W” and max entry
“max X|W” create a sum (or max) operator node for
each possible w with a child corresponding to each possible x. The product entry “∗X|W” creates a product
operator for each possible w with three children: the
next operator as one child, and θx|u and λx as the
other children (where u ⊆ w are the parents of X in
the original influence diagram).
For example, the decision circuit for the example in
Figure 1 and backbone in Figure 3 corresponds to the
following system, equivalent to the one in Section 3:

g(e) =

P

c

λc θc|d1

P

e

λe θe|c,d2

P

a [g1 (e1 )g2 (e2 )]

+B
*B|B
max D1 | B
* D1 | D1, B
* V1 | D1

Table 1: Comparative size of linear and branching decision circuits for different versions of the influence diagrams shown in Figures 1 and 2, and the oil wildcatter
problem in Raiffa [1968].

+ C | B, D

+F|D
* F | F, D
max D3 | F
* D3 | D3, F

+ E | C, D
* E | E, C, D
max D2 | E
* D2 | D2, E

+ A | B, C

+ H | F, D3

+ G | E, D2
* G | G, E, D2

* A, C | A, C, B
*zero value

* H | H, F, D3
+ K | H, D3

max D4 | G, D2
* D4 | D4, G, D2
+ I | G,D2,D4
* I | I, G,D2,D4

* V4 | D3

* K | K, H, D3
+ J | H, K
* J | J, H, K
* V3 | J, K

+ L | I, D4
* L | L, I, D4
* V2 | L

Figure 4: Branching decision circuit backbone for the influence diagram and target order shown in Figure 2.

g(e0 ) =

P
maxd1 λd1 c λc θc|d1
P
maxd2 λd2 e λe θe|c,d2
0
a [g1 (e 1 )g2 (e2 )

P
g1 (e1 ) =

P

b

+ g1 (e1 )g2 (e0 2 )]

λa θa|b,e λb θb (1)

0

g1 (e 1 ) =

0

g2 (e2 ) =

1

0

maxd3 λd3 λv θv|a,d3

g2 (e 2 ) =

Example
Figure 1, binary
Figure 1, 3 states
Figure 1, 4 states
Figure 2, binary
Figure 2, 3 states
Figure 2, 4 states
Oil Wildcatter

+ D | B, D1
* D | D, B, D1

Given non-responsive evidence e, sweep upward in the
constructed decision circuit to compute g(e) and g(e0 ).
For any strategy s, g(e) = P {e|s} = P {e}, and
P
g(e0 ) = maxs E{ V λv V |s, e}P {e|s}
P
= g(e) maxs V λv E{V |s, e}.
This approach builds on Darwiche [2000, 2003] and
Bhattacharjya and Shachter [2007] and leads to the
following result. Because the time and space complexity are governed by the size of the decision circuit,
we can relate the complexity to the structure of the
directed chordal graph determined by the original influence diagram and target variable elimination order.
The tree-width of the influence diagram evaluation is
exactly the number of nodes in the largest family in the
directed chordal graph. (By contrast, the construction

Linear
138
396
860
1,668
13,755
64,576
1,746

Branching
138
387
828
512
1,812
4,664
1,320

of the decision circuit backbone is only on the order of
the number of edges in that directed chordal graph.)
Theorem 2 (Decision Circuit Evaluation). Given an
influence diagram and consistent target variable elimination order, the decision circuit constructed from the
directed chordal graph and decision circuit backbone
will correctly compute P {e} = g(e) and maximal expected value g(e0 )/g(e) for the diagram.
The time and space complexity for this computation
and for the computation of all of the partial derivatives of both functions with respect to the influence diagram parameters is of the order of O(nst ), where t is
the treewidth (in our case, the size of the largest family in the directed chordal graph), n is the number of
variables in the influence diagram, and s is the largest
number of states for any variable. Alternatively, the
time and space complexity is of the order of O(nS)
where S is the largest number of states in any family
in the directed chordal graph.
4.4

Comparing Branching and Linear
Decision Circuits

In this section, we compare the new branching method
presented in this paper with the linear method presented in Bhattacharjya and Shachter [2007], counting
the number of arcs in the decision circuits for each
approach. We consider three influence diagram examples, the diagrams shown in Figure 1 [Dittmer and
Jensen, 1997] and Figure 2 [Jensen, et al, 1994], and
the oil wildcatter drilling problem [Raiffa, 1968]. For
the first two we construct circuits assuming all variables are binary and also assuming all variables have
either three or four states. The target variable elimination orders (shown in the captions in Figure 1 and
Figure 2) were chosen to minimize the size of the linear decision circuit with the multiple values combined
into a single value. The results are shown in Table 1.
For the influence diagram shown in Figure 1 with a

single value node and only a small opportunity for
branching, the overhead of branching cancels out the
benefit when there are only two states, and most of the
benefit when there are more states. However, in the
other two problems where there are multiple additive
values, the benefit is much more substantial than the
overhead, and that benefit dramatically increases with
the number of states.

5

DECISION CIRCUITS AND
LOCAL STRUCTURE

In this section, we discuss some types of local structure
in influence diagrams and how we can exploit it to
compile more compact decision circuits.
Influence diagrams naturally represent symmetric decision situations at the graphical level, while any asymmetry is represented at the local level within the distributions. Bielza and Shenoy [1999] compare how different graphical models deal with asymmetry.
It is natural for real world decision problems to exhibit
asymmetry, with many zeros in CPTs. To exploit local
structure when compiling a decision circuit, it matters
whether a particular parameter might change. For example, if we want a particular zero to always stay zero,
even during sensitivity analysis, we call it a hard zero.
The presence of hard zeros and ones allows us to prune
the decision circuit, eliminating nodes and arcs [Bhattacharjya, 2008]. Situations where we can prune an
intermediate node (neither a leaf nor a root) or an arc
include: a node with a hard 0 child, a product node
with a hard 1 child, a node with only one child, and a
node whose incoming arcs have all been pruned.
Another way to create more compact decision circuits
is with coalescence, giving a node multiple parents.
Coalescence has usually been hand-crafted for decision trees, as it has been difficult to automate [Bielza
and Shenoy, 1999]. Conditional independence is a rich
source of coalescence in decision circuits at the global
level [Darwiche, 2000], as is the branching we exploit
in this paper. When there is no coalescence in the circuit, the circuit resembles a full tree, exponential in
the number of variables. In general, the size of the
decision circuit is exponential in the size of the largest
family in the directed chordal graph, and conditional
independence and branching in the global structure
can be exploited to limit the circuit size.
Coalescence can be employed at the local level whenever the same symbolic sub-circuit can be re-used
[Chavira, 2007]. This can be most easily recognized
at the lowest level. For example, if a product node for
x|u is created for λx θx|u , it can be reused whenever
U ⊂ W in “∗X|W”.

6

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE
RESEARCH

In this paper we have shown how significantly smaller
and more efficient decision circuits can be built than
with the linear vertex elimination method in Bhattacharjya and Shachter [2007]. Given a target variable
elimination order, we are able to exploit separate value
nodes and conditionally independent subproblems to
construct a branching structure over subproblems. We
introduce a branching operator and a decision circuit
backbone as a compact graphical representation for a
symmetric decision circuit. We show how the influence
diagram and target order determine a directed chordal
graph to guide the construction process. The resulting
circuit can be compiled, exploiting the local structure.
The promise of decision circuits is that by compiling the fundamental operations used in junction tree
methods exploiting conditional independence and separable values with local operations exploiting asymmetry, we should be able to outperform other exact
methods. The advances in this paper help us realize
some of those benefits.
Once we have a compiled decision circuit, it can efficiently address a variety of queries in real time, and
perform a full sensitivity analysis [Bhattacharjya and
Shachter, 2008, 2010]. We are not only able to compute the optimal policy as we manipulate the input parameters, but also the derivative of our objective with
respect to all of those parameters. Because the compiled circuit accepts evidence, we can compute quantities such as the value of clairvoyance that can not
be determined from the derivatives, taking full advantage of any separable value function in our influence
diagram.
We can easily incorporate a few enhancements. First,
we can recognize circumstances under which some alternatives might not be available [Smith et al, 1993].
Second, we could introduce product branching in addition to our (additive) branching to allow value functions with nested sums and products as in Tatman
and Shachter [1990]. The corresponding operator is
just the existing product operator. Finally, instead of
computing both g(e0 ) and g(e) using the same circuit,
we could build a simpler arithmetic circuit to compute
g(e), reducing compute time, and creating even more
opportunities for pruning during compilation.

Acknowledgements
We thank the anonymous referees for their suggestions.

References

II, Strategic Decisions Group, Menlo Park, CA.

Bhattacharjya, D., 2008, Decision Circuits: A graphical representation for efficient decision analysis computation, Ph.D Thesis, Stanford University.

Jensen, F., Jensen, F. V., and Dittmer, S., 1994, From
influence diagrams to junction trees, In Lopez de Mantaras, R., and Poole, D., editors, Proc. of 10th UAI,
pp. 367-373, Seattle, WA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann,
San Mateo, CA.

Bhattacharjya, D., and Shachter, R., 2007, Evaluating
influence diagrams with decision circuits, In Parr, R.,
and van der Gaag, L., editors, Proc. of 23rd UAI, pp.
9–16, Vancouver, BC, Canada: AUAI Press.

Luque, M., and Diez, F. J., 2009, Variable elimination
for influence diagrams with super value nodes, Intl.
Journal of Approximate Reasoning, 51, pp. 615-631.

Bhattacharjya, D., and Shachter, R., 2008, Sensitivity
analysis in decision circuits, In McAllester, D., and
Myullymki, P., editors, Proc. of 24th UAI, pp. 34-42,
Helsinki, Finland: AUAI Press.

Nielsen, T., and Jensen, F. V, 1999, Well-defined decision scenarios, In Laskey, K., and Prade, H., editors,
Proc. of 15th UAI, pp. 502-511, Stockholm, Sweden:
Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA.

Bhattacharjya, D., and Shachter, R., 2010, Three new
sensitivity analysis methods for influence diagrams, In
Proc. of 26th UAI, Catalina Island, CA.

Park, J., and Darwiche, A., 2004, A differential semantics for jointree algorithms, AI, 156, pp. 197-216.

Bielza, C., and Shenoy, P., 1999, A comparison of
graphical techniques for asymmetric decision problems, Management Science, 45 (11), pp. 1552-1569.
Chavira, M., 2007, Beyond treewidth in probabilistic
inference, Ph.D Thesis, University of California, Los
Angeles.
Chavira, M., and Darwiche, A., 2005, Compiling
Bayesian networks with local structure, In Proc. of
19th Intl. Joint Conf. on AI, Edinburgh, Scotland,
pp. 1306-1312.
Darwiche, A., 2000, A differential approach to inference in Bayesian networks, In Boutilier, C., and Goldszmidt, M., editors, Proc. of 16th UAI, pp. 123-132,
Stanford, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo,
CA.
Darwiche, A., 2002, A logical approach to factoring
belief networks, In Proc. of Intl. Conf. on Knowledge
Representation and Reasoning, pp. 409-420.
Darwiche, A., 2003, A differential approach to inference in Bayesian networks, Journal of the ACM,
50(3), pp. 280-305.
Dittmer, S. and Jensen, F., 1997, Myopic value of
information in influence diagrams, In D. Geiger and
Shenoy, P., editors, Proc. of 13th UAI, pp. 142-149:
Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA.
Golumbic, M. C., 1980, Algorithmic Graph Theory and
Perfect Graphs, Academic Press, London.
Heckerman, D. and Shachter, R., 1995, Decisiontheoretic foundations for causal reasoning, Journal of
AI Research, 3, pp. 405-430.
Howard, R., and Matheson, J., 1984, Influence diagrams, In Howard, R., and Matheson, J., editors, The
Principles and Applications of Decision Analysis, Vol.

Raiffa, H., 1968, Decision Analysis, Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA.
Shachter, R., 1998, Bayes-ball: The rational pastime
(for determining irrelevance and requisite information
in belief networks and influence diagrams), In Cooper,
G., and Moral, S., editors, Proc. of 14th UAI, pp.
480-487, Madison, WI, USA: Morgan Kaufmann, San
Francisco, CA.
Shachter, R., 1999, Efficient value of information computation, In Laskey, K., and Prade, H., editors, Proc.
of 15th UAI, pp. 594-601, Stockholm, Sweden: Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA.
Shachter, R., Andersen, S., and Poh, K. L., 1990, Directed reduction algorithms and decomposable graphs,
In Proc. of 6th UAI, pp. 237-244, Cambridge, MA.
Shachter, R., and Peot, M., 1992, Decision making
using probabilistic inference methods, In Dubois, D.,
Wellman, M. P., D’Ambrosio, B., and Smets, P., editors, Proc. of 8th UAI, pp. 276-283, Stanford, CA:
Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA.
Smith, J., Holtzman, S., and Matheson, J., 1993,
Structuring conditional relationships in influence diagrams, Operations Research, 41(2), pp. 280-297.
Tarjan, R., and Yannakakis, M., 1984, Simple lineartime algorithms to test chordality of graphs, test
acyclicity of hypergraphs, and selectively reduce
acyclic hypergraphs. SIAM Journal of Computing, 13,
pp. 566-579.
Tatman, J., and Shachter, R., 1990, Dynamic programming and influence diagrams, IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 20(2), pp. 365379.

