Learning Why Things Change:
The Difference-Based Causality Learner

Mark Voortman
mark@voortman.name
Decision Systems Laboratory
School of Information Sciences
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA

Denver Dash∗
denver.h.dash@intel.com
Intel Research
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA

Abstract
In this paper, we present the DifferenceBased Causality Learner (DBCL), an algorithm for learning a class of discrete-time dynamic models that represents all causation
across time by means of difference equations
driving change in a system. We motivate
this representation with real-world mechanical systems and prove DBCL’s correctness
for learning structure from time series data,
an endeavour that is complicated by the existence of latent derivatives that have to be
detected. We also prove that, under common
assumptions for causal discovery, DBCL will
identify the presence or absence of feedback
loops, making the model more useful for predicting the effects of manipulating variables
when the system is in equilibrium. We argue analytically and show empirically the advantages of DBCL over vector autoregression
(VAR) and Granger causality models as well
as modified forms of Bayesian and constraintbased structure discovery algorithms. Finally, we show that our algorithm can discover causal directions of alpha rhythms in
human brains from EEG data.

1

INTRODUCTION AND
MOTIVATION

In the past 20 years in AI, the practice of learning
causal models from data has received considerable attention [cf., Pearl and Verma, 1991, Cooper and Herskovits, 1992, Spirtes et al., 2000]. Existing methods
∗

Also Department of Biomedical Informatics, School of
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh.
†
Also Faculty of Computer Science, Bialystok University of Technology, Wiejska 45A, 15-351 Bialystok, Poland.

Marek J. Druzdzel†
marek@sis.pitt.edu
Decision Systems Laboratory
School of Information Sciences
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA

are based on the formalism of structural equation models (SEMs), which originated in the econometrics literature over 50 years ago [cf., Strotz and Wold, 1960],
and Bayesian networks [Pearl, 1987] which started the
paradigm shift of graphical models in AI and machine
learning 20 years ago. These methods have predominately focused on the learning of equilibrium (static)
causal structure, and have recently gained inroads into
mainstream scientific research, especially in biology
[cf., Sachs et al., 2005].
Despite the success of these static methods, many realworld systems are dynamic in nature and are accurately modeled by systems of simultaneous differential equations. Temporal causality, in general, has
been studied extensively in econometrics over the past
four decades: Granger causality and vector autoregression (VAR) methods have become very influential
[cf., Granger, 1969, Engle and Granger, 1987, Sims,
1980]. In AI, there has been work on learning Dynamic
Bayesian Networks (DBNs) [Friedman et al., 1998] and
modified Granger causality [Eichler and Didelez, 2007].
None of these models explicitly take into account the
fact that many dynamic systems are based on differential equations. This makes their representations overly
general for such systems, allowing arbitrary causal relations across time. In this paper, we show that differential equations impose strict constraints on crosstemporal causal edges, and we present a method that
is capable of exploiting that fact.
This paper considers Difference-Based Causal Models
(DBCMs), a class of discrete-time dynamic models inspired by Iwasaki and Simon [1994] that models all
causation across time by means of difference equations
driving change in the system. This paper presents
the first method to learn DBCMs from data: the
Difference-Based Causality Learner (DBCL). This algorithm treats differences as latent variables and conducts an efficient search to find them in the course of
constructing a DBCM. This method exploits the fact
that unknown derivatives have fixed relationships to

known variables and so are easier to find than latent
variables in general. We prove that DBCL correctly
learns DBCMs given faithfulness and a conditional independence oracle, and show empirically that it is also
robust in the sense of avoiding unnecessary calculations of higher-order derivatives, thus preventing mistakes due to numerical errors. We show that compared
to Granger causality and VAR models, DBCL output
is much more parsimonious and informative. We also
show empirically that it outperforms variants of the
PC algorithm and greedy Bayesian search algorithms
that have been modified to assume DBCM structure.
Finally, we prove that DBCL will always identify instantaneous feedback loops when the underlying system is a DBCM, making it easier to detect when an
equilibrated model will be causal. To our knowledge,
no other method for causal discovery is guaranteed to
identify the presence or absence of feedback loops.

2

for the harmonic oscillator are given by Newton’s 2nd
law describing the acceleration a of the mass under
the forces (due to the weight, due to the spring, Fx ,
and due to viscosity, Fv ) acting on the block. These
forces instantaneously determine a; furthermore, they
indirectly determine the values of all integrals of a,
in particular the velocity v and the position x, of the
block. The longer time passes, the more influence the
forces have on those integrals. Writing this continuous time system as a discrete time model, v and x
are approximately determined by the difference equations: v t+1 = v t + at ∆t and xt+1 = xt + v t ∆t, resulting in the cross-temporal causal links in the graph of
Figure 1(a) and (b). Thus, differential equation systems imply cross-temporal arcs with a regular structure. DBCMs assume that all cross-temporal arcs are
of this form.

DIFFERENCE-BASED CAUSAL
MODELS

Stated briefly, a DBCM is a discrete-time model, based
on SEMs, with a graphical interpretation very similar
to DBNs. Contemporaneous causation is allowed, i.e.,
like DBNs, variables can be caused by other variables
in the same time slice. The defining characteristic of
a DBCM is that all causation across time is due to a
derivative (e.g., ẋ) causing a change in its integral (e.g.,
x). This cross-temporal restriction makes DBCMs a
subset of causal models as defined by Pearl [2000] and
structural equation models similar to those discussed
50 years ago by Strotz and Wold [1960]. DBCM-like
models were discussed by Iwasaki and Simon [1994]
and Dash [2003, 2005] to analyze causality in dynamic
systems, but to date no algorithm exists to learn them
from data.
As an example, consider the set of equations describing the motion of a damped simple harmonic oscillator
(SHO). A block of mass m is suspended from a spring
in a viscous fluid and several different forces are acting
on it, such as the forces resulting from the spring and
that of gravity. The harmonic oscillator is an archetypal dynamic system, ubiquitous in nature. Although
a linear system, it can form a good approximation to
many nonlinear systems close to equilibrium. Furthermore, the F = ma relationship is a canonical example of contemporaneous causation: applying a force to
cause a body to accelerate instantly. Thus, although
this system is simple, it illustrates many important
points. Causal interactions even in such a simple system are problematic when using standard representations for causality, as we will show shortly.
Like all mechanical systems, the equations of motion

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) The causal graph of a DBCM for the
mass-spring system is always first-order Markovian.
(b) The shorthand graph of (a) using dashed edges
to indicate cross-temporal causation. (c) The unrolled
graph with all v’s and a’s marginalized out is infiniteorder Markovian.
More formally, DBCMs are a restricted form of structural equation models (SEMs). We first review these
models, and then discuss our additional constraints.
We use the notation (A ⊥
⊥ B | C ) to indicate that
variable A is conditionally independent on B given a
set of variables C .
Definition 1 (structural equation model). A SEM is
a pair hV , E i, where V = {V1 , . . . , Vn } is a set of
variables, and E = {E1 , . . . , En } is a set of equations
such that each Ei ∈ E can be written in the form:
Vi := fi (W i , γi ) where W i ⊆ V \ Vi is called the set
of causes (or parents) of Vi , denoted by Pa(Vi ), and
the γi are noise terms such that (γi ⊥
⊥ γj ), i 6= j.
The noise terms γi are intended to represent the set of
causes of each variable that are not directly accounted
for in the model. Historically, SEMs use linear equations with normally distributed noise terms.
A SEM defines a directed graph such that each variable X ∈ V is represented by a node and there is
an edge Y → X for each Y ∈ Pa(X). In this way,
SEMs can model relations between variables in a very

general way. Furthermore, SEMs can be used to represent causality in dynamic systems for a discretetime-setting by defining the set of variables to be a
time-series: V = V 0 ∪ V 1 ∪ V 2 , . . ., where V t =
{V1t , . . . , Vnt } denotes the set of n variables at time t.
We call SEMs that partition their variables according
to time indices dynamic SEMs.
DBCMs are a restricted form of dynamic SEMs. They
assume that all causation across time is due to instantaneous causation of the difference of some variables:
Definition 2 (Difference variable). Let V = V 0 ∪
V 1 ∪ V 2 ∪ . . . be a time-series. The n-th order difference variable ∆n V t of variable V t ∈ V t is defined
recursively as:
∆n V t = ∆n−1 V t+1 − ∆n−1 V t ,

with ∆0 V t = V t .

In particular: ∆1 V t = V t+1 − V t , which we sometimes shorten to ∆V t . When we invert the difference equation to give the value of V t+1 in terms of
its past value and its difference, we call it the integral
equation of V t+1 . I.e., the integral equation of V t+1
is V t+1 = V t + ∆V t . Integral equations are identities and so are always deterministic. The graphs of
Figure 1 use the standard notation from physics such
that the derivative of x is velocity (v ≡ ∆1 x) and the
derivative of velocity is acceleration (a ≡ ∆2 x).
A DBCM is a dynamic SEM in which all causation
across time is due to the presence of integral equations. Because all DBCMs are based on difference
equations that do not vary from time to time, we can
restrict ourselves to partitioning the variables into two
time slices {0, 1}, where the 0th time slice determines
the initial conditions and 1st time slice determines the
transitions:
Definition 3 (Difference-Based Causal Model). A
DBCM M is a dynamic SEM S = hV , E i with V =
V 0 ∪ V 1 and E = E 0 ∪ E 1 such that there exists
a cross-temporal parent of some variable Vi1 ∈ V 1 if
and only if Ei1 is the integral equation for variable Vi1 .
This definition implies that the parent set of a variable X 1 that has parents in the previous time slice is
Pa(X 1 ) = {X 0 , ∆X 0 }. If this is the case, we call X an
integral variable. An integral variable X is part of a
chain of causation ∆j X 0 → ∆j−1 X 1 → . . . → X j .
We call the highest derivative (∆j X) of this chain
the prime variable of X, which we will also denote
as Prime(X). In the example of Figure 1, variables x
and v are integral variables, and a is the prime variable
of x and v.
Finally, any variable that is not an integral variable
and is not a prime variable is called a static variable. This term does not imply that the variable is

not changing from time-step to time-step, because it
might have a causal ancestor that is part of an integration chain. However, we use this term to emphasize that the change is not due to a dynamic process
involving these variables. In Figure 1, m, Fv and Fx
are static variables.
The definition of DBCMs does not require that the
contemporaneous structure be acyclic; however, in this
paper we only consider acyclic DBCMs. It should be
emphasized that this assumption does not restrict us
to non-feedback systems; rather, this assumption implies that all feedback requires time to occur and thus
will only occur through an integral variable. E.g., the
position x of the mass in the SHO causes an instantaneous spring force Fx that results in an instantaneous acceleration a. Over time, a causes a change
in x via integration. Thus we have the feedback loop:
x0 → Fx0 → a0 → v 1 → x2 . Although the instantaneous part, x0 → Fx0 → a0 , is acyclic, this is still
a feedback system. Fb(X) is the set of instantaneous
descendants of X which are also ancestors of Prime(X)
(in this example, Fb(x) = {Fx }). Another interpretation is that by rejecting instantaneous loops we assume
that the observation time-scale is much smaller than
any time-scale of the system dynamics.
Since the contemporaneous structure is not changing
over time, the equations in E 0 and E 1 are partially
overlapping: those that correspond to contemporaneous structure are identical in both sets, but E 0 contains initial conditions for all integral variables, and
E 1 contains integral equations for integral variables.
The graph in Figure 1(b) is a compressed version of the
fully unrolled DBCM. The cycle in the graph caused by
the dashed links is really an acyclic structure extending
across time.
2.1

COMPARISON OF
REPRESENTATIONS

Dynamic SEMs, like Granger causality and VAR models, allow arbitrary edges to exist across time. For
many real physical systems this representation is too
general.
DBCMs, by contrast, assume that all causation works
in the same way as in mechanical systems. This restriction represents a tradeoff between expressibility
and tractability. On one hand, DBCMs are only able
to represent mechanical systems that are first-order
Markovian. On the other hand, DBCMs are in principle easier to learn because, even when the derivatives
are unobserved in the data as we will assume (e.g., in
the previously introduced example we do not include
v and a, or any other derivative in the data set), at
least we know something about these latent variables

that are required to make the system Markovian.
When confronted with data that was generated by differential equations with some derivatives missing, the
distinction between DBCL and the other approaches
becomes glaring. Whereas, as we will show shortly,
DBCL attempts to search for and identify the latent
derivative variables, other approaches would try to
marginalize them out. One might suspect that there
is not much difference. For example, one might expect
that a second order differential equation would simply result in a second-order Markov model when the
derivatives are marginalized out. Unfortunately that is
not the case, because the causation among the derivatives forms an infinite chain into the past. Thus, any
approach that tries to marginalize out the derivatives
must include infinite edges in the model, for example,
such as those in Figure 1(c). In the harmonic oscillator system with all derivatives marginalized out, all
parents of a in time-slice i of the DBCM are parents
of x for all time slices j > i + 1. Thus, the benefits of
using the DBCM representation are not merely computational, but in fact, without learning the derivatives directly, the correct model does not have a finite
representation.

3

DBCM LEARNING

The DBCM Learning problem can be posed in the
following way: Given time-series data over a set of
variables V , derive a DBCM over a set of variables
V ∪ V∆ , where V∆ contains differences of variables
that are derived from the original data. In other words,
DBCL does not assume all relevant derivatives or the
order of those derivatives are known. Instead, it treats
these missing derivatives as latent variables and tries
to discover them. We assume that, aside from these
derivatives, there are no other latent confounding variables present. Note, for example, that this assumption
also rules out the existence of structures of the form
∆X → X → Y , where ∆X and X are latent and Y is
observable, because the X process forms a latent chain
across time that can confound Y at different times.
DBCL relies on the standard assumption of faithfulness [Spirtes et al., 2000]. Faithfulness is the converse
of the Markov condition, and it is the critical assumption that allows structure to be uncovered from independence relations. However, when a dynamic system
goes through equilibrium, by definition, faithfulness is
violated. For example, if the motion of the block in the
simple harmonic oscillator reaches equilibrium then,
by definition, the equation a = (Fx + Fv + mg)/m becomes 0 = Fx +Fv +mg. This means that the values of
the forces acting on the block are no longer correlated
with the value of a, even though they are direct causes

of a. Thus, by assuming faithfulness, we are implicitly
assuming that no equilibrations have occurred.
3.1

THE ALGORITHM

DBCL consists of two steps: (1) detecting prime (and
integral) variables (V∆ ), and (2) learning the contemporaneous structure. The first step is achieved by calculating numerical derivatives of all variables and then
deciding which ones should be prime variables. This
is based on the following theorem, which exploits the
fact that only prime variables can always be made independent across time by conditioning on variables in
V 1:
Theorem 1 (detecting prime variables). Let I be the
set of conditional independence relations implied by
faithfulness applied to a DBCM M = hV , E i with
V = V 0 ∪ V 1 and E = E 0 ∪ E 1 . Let ∆j X 0 denote the j-th order difference of some X 0 ∈ V 0 . Then
∆j X 0 is the prime variable of X 0 if and only if it can
be d-separated from itself in the future and none of the
lower order differences can be d-separated, i.e.:
1. there exists a W
⊂
V1
j 0
j 1
(∆ X ⊥
⊥ ∆ X | W ) ∈ I, and

such

that

2. there exists no set W 0 ⊂ V 1 such that
(∆k X 0 ⊥
⊥ ∆k X 1 | W 0 ) ∈ I, for all k < j.
Once we have found V∆ , the set of integral and
prime variables in the model, learning contemporaneous structure over the two-time-slice model becomes a
problem of learning a time-series model from causally
sufficient data (i.e., there do not exist any latent common causes).
Theorem 2 shows that we can learn the contemporaneous structure from time-series data despite the fact
that data from time-to-time is not independent. This
is because we know by construction that the integral
variables will d-separate the time slices, so all structure between variables can be obtained by conditioning
only on variables in the same time slice:
Theorem 2 (learning contemporaneous structure).
Let I be the set of conditional independence relations implied by faithfulness applied to a DBCM M =
hV , E i, where V = V 0 ∪ V 1 . There is an edge
X 1 − Y 1 if and only if:
1. Either X 1 or Y 1 is not an integral variable, and
1

2. there exists no V 0 ⊂ V 1 \ {X 1 , Y 1 } such that
1
(X 1 ⊥
⊥ Y 1 | V 0 ) ∈ I.
In addition to having discovered the latent variables
in the data, and the structure between non-integral

variables, we also know that there can be no contemporaneous edges between two integral variables, and
integral variables can have only outgoing contemporaneous edges. We can thus restrict the search space
of causal structures. Theorems 1 and 2 together with
these constraints form the basis of the DBCL algorithm:
Algorithm 1 (DBCL (sketch)).
Input: a maximum difference parameter kmax > 0,
a time-series dataset D over a set of variables V 0 =
0
0
V0 ∪V1 .
Output: a set V∆ of prime and integral variables,
0
and a partially directed graph G over V = V ∪ V∆ .
1. Find relevant latent derivatives (Theorem 1):
(a) Initialize k = 0, and let V∆ be all differences
up to kmax .
(b) Let W be all variables plus their differences
up to kth order that are in V∆ .
(c) For all V ∈ V 0 without a prime variable,
check to see if there exists a set W 0 ⊂ W
that renders ∆i V 0 independent of ∆i V 1 , for
the i ≤ k. If so, remove all ∆j V 1 , j > i0 ,
from V∆ where i0 is the lowest i for which
the independence occurred.
(d) Let k = k + 1. If not all prime variables have
been found and k ≤ kmax , go to Step 1b.
2. Learn the structure (Theorem 2):
(a) Learn the contemporaneous structure by using any correct causal discovery algorithm
under causally sufficient data. Impose the
following constraints:
i. Forbid edges between all integral variables.
ii. If X is an integral variable with an edge
X − Y , direct the edge such that X → Y .
(b) Add all cross-temporal links specified by the
set of integral and prime variables.
The output of DBCL will depend on the algorithm
used in Step 2. Our implementation is based on
the constraint-based search PC algorithm, so the contemporaneous structure will be a partially directed
graph that represents the statistical equivalence class
in which the true directed graph belongs. One might
argue that because there are deterministic relationships (the integral equations) in a DBCM, the faithfulness assumption is not valid. However, all deterministic relations involve exactly 3 variables, e.g., ∆X 0 , X 0
and X 1 . However two of those variables are in time
slice 0, so DBCL’s conditioning tests never involve all
three variables at the same time. The hidden variable
thus effectively adds noise to the deterministic relationship.

3.2

IDENTIFICATION OF EMC
VIOLATION

Given a model output from DBCL, one might be interested in performing causal inference, i.e., prediciting the effects of manipulating components of the system. This operation is complicated by the presence of
equilibrations that may have occurred in the system.
Dash [2003, 2005] shows that some dynamic systems
do not obey Equilibration-Manipulation Commutability (EMC), i.e., the causal graph that results when
an equilibrium model is manipulated can be different
from the (true) graph that results when the dynamic
model is manipulated and then equilibrated. Dash
points out two conditions which aid in EMC identification: First, if a variable is self-regulating, meaning
that X ∈ P a(Prime(X)), then when X is equilibrated,
the parent set of X and the children set of X are unchanged. Thus, with respect to manipulations on X,
the EMC condition is obeyed. Second, a sufficient condition for the violation of EMC exists when the set of
feedback variables of some (non-self-regulating) X is
nonempty in the equilibrium graph. In this case, there
will always exist a manipulation that violates EMC.
Given a DBCM with all edges oriented, it is trivial to
check these two conditions; however, since DBCL is
not guaranteed to find the orientation of every edge
in the DBCM structure, it is not obvious that DBCL
is useful for identifying EMC violation. The following
theorem shows that DBCL output will always identify
self-regulating variables:
Theorem 3. Let D be a DBCM with a variable X
that has a prime variable Prime(X). The partially
directed graph returned by Algorithm 1 with a perfect
independence oracle will have an edge between X and
Prime(X) if and only if X is self-regulating.
It is easy to show that a feedback set of X is empty
if and only if all paths from X to Prime(X) have
a collider. Again, since DBCL is not guaranteed to
identify all edge orientations, not all colliders are necessarily identified. According to the faithfulness condition, DBCL will detect a correct equivalence class,
and so will detect the correct adjacencies and the
correct v-structures (unshielded colliders); thus Theorem 4 shows that we can always identify whether or
not Fb(X) is empty:
Theorem 4. Let G be the contemporaneous graph
of a DBC model. Then for a variable X in G,
Fb(X) = ∅ if and only if for each undirected path P =
hP0 , P1 , . . . , Pn i between P0 = X and Pn = Prime(X),
there exists a v-structure Pi → Pj ← Pk in G such that
Pi , P j , P k ∈ P .
Theorem 4 asserts that we can determine whether or

not there exists a directed path from X to Prime(X).
In fact, this theorem does not make use of the fact
that the path terminates on a prime variable, so it
actually serves as an identifiability proof for all causal
descendants of any integral variable.

4

RESULTS

For our empirical studies, we generated data from real
physical systems that are representative of the type of
systems found in nature. We also applied DBCL to
real EEG brain data to reveal the causal propagation
of alpha waves.1
Validation of DBCL is complicated by the fact that, as
far as we know, there exist few suitable baseline methods that are even in principle able to correctly learn
a DBCM when derivatives are unknown. As discussed
in Section 2.1, if one tries to learn causal relations with
the latent variables marginalized out, an infinite-order
Markov model results (Figure 1(c)). The FCI algorithm [Spirtes et al., 2000], which attempts to take into
consideration latent variables, would also result in an
infinite-order Markov model because it does not try to
isolate and learn the latent variables and the structure
between them and the observables. The structural EM
algorithm [Friedman, 1998] does try to learn explicit
latent variables and structure. However, applying it
naively would be unfair since DBCL uses background
information about the latent variables that structural
EM would not be privy to.
Thus, in order to provide a fair baseline, we chose
to adapt some standard algorithms for discovery from
causally sufficient data by providing them with known
information about the latent derivatives. We used
both the PC algorithm and a greedy Bayesian approach on a data set with all differences up to some
maximum kmax = 3 calculated a priori, and we applied
some heuristics to interpret the output as a DBCM.
While perhaps not fully satisfying, we felt that this
provided the fairest comparison to a baseline. Essentially, this allows us to assess how well Step 1
of DBCL (the main novel component) performed on
learning latent differences. Once those latent differences are found, we used the PC algorithm and the
Bayesian search algorithm to recover the contemporaneous structure, but without imposing the structure
of a DBCM. In PC and DBCM we used a significance
level of 0.01. The Bayesian approach starts with an
empty network and then first greedily adds arcs using a Bayesian score with the K2 prior [Cooper and
1
All experiments were performed with SMILE,
a Bayesian inference engine developed at the
Decision Systems Laboratory and available at
http://genie.sis.pitt.edu/.

Herskovits, 1992], and then greedily removes arcs. For
the Bayesian approach we discretized the data into five
bins with approximately equal counts. It is possible to
use a Bayesian approach without discretizing the data
[Geiger and Heckerman, 1994], which we may explore
in the future.
4.1

HARMONIC OSCILLATORS

We tested DBCL on models of two physical systems,
namely a SHO and the more complex coupled SHO
shown in Figure 2(a). Although the SHO is a deter-

(a)

(b)

(c)
Figure 2: (a) The causal graph of the coupled SHO
system. (b) A typical Granger causality graph recovered with simulated data. (c) The number of parents
of x1 over time-lag recovered from a VAR model (typical results).
ministic system, having noise is still realistic: e.g., friction, air pressure, temperature, all of these factors are
weak latent causes that add noise when determining
the forces of the system. Thus all non-integral equations used Gaussian error terms that were resampled
at every time interval. For both systems we selected
parameters of our models in such a way that they were
stable, i.e., produced measurements within reasonable
bounds. We generated 100 data sets of 5,000 records
for each system. We should emphasize that, as mentioned earlier, we do not include the derivatives in the
data set, but only the original variables.
We first computed Granger causality models and VAR
models for some of the simulated data for the coupled
SHO just to illustrate how uninformative these models

are when the latent derivatives are unknown. Those results are shown in Figure 2(b) and Figure 2(c), respectively. The Granger graph is more difficult to interpret
than the DBCM because of the presence of multiple
double-headed edges indicating latent confounders. It
was noted that the sole integral variables appeared in
the Granger graph with reflexive edges, which might
lead to an alternative algorithm for finding prime variables. However, the Granger graph does not provide
enough information to perform causal reasoning. The
VAR model is also difficult to interpret, as it attempts
to learn structure over time of an infinite-order Markov
model. The graph of Figure 2(c) shows that variable
x1 has 65 parents spread out over time-lags from 1 to
100 (binned into groups of ∆t = 20) at significance
level of 0.05. Thus while VAR models might be useful for prediction, they provide little insight into the
causality of DBCMs.
There were four algorithms used for quantitative baselines: two based on the PC algorithm and two based on
the Bayesian algorithm. We will call them P C1 , P C2 ,
B1 , and B2 , respectively. For all baselines the procedure for detecting the prime variables was the same:
all derivatives up to a maximum order were precalculated, and prime variables were determined to be the
lowest order derivative that was not connected to itself
in the future in the output graph. In the second step
P C1 and B1 reported the contemporaneous structure
that was found during the search for prime variables.
For P C2 and B2 , a separate step was made wherein we
created a new dataset using only the derivatives found
in step 1, and relearned contemporaneous structure
from this reduced dataset. The results for the SHO
are shown in the following table:
PC1
PC2
B1
B2
DBC

%∆low
0.00
0.00
17
17
0.00

%∆hi
0.50
0.50
72
72
0.50

%Edel
39
100
60
78
0.40

%Eadd
230
100
200
120
1.2

%Oerr
26
1.0
20
14
0.60

The first two columns of the table show the percentage
of derivatives too low and to high, respectively. The
other three columns of the table show the percentage of edges that were deleted, added, and incorrectly
oriented. For example, on average, DBCL added 1.2
extra edges for every 100 edges in the correct graph,
whereas P C2 added 104 extra edges per 100 original
edges.
The table below shows the results for the coupled SHO:
P C1
P C2
B1
B2
DBC

%∆low
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

%∆hi
12
12
93
93
0.25

%Edel
40
84
64
42
0.58

%Eadd
200
26
170
140
1.3

%Oerr
23
14
8.5
21
6.4

These results show that DBCL is effective at both

learning the correct difference variables and of learning contemporaneous structure of these systems. For
the SHO, the PC baselines are performing as well as
DBCL for discovering prime variables; however, when
the network gets more complicated, there is a clear
difference. Also, in all cases the second step makes
a big difference between baselines and DBCM, most
likely because enforcing the DBCM structure is essential. We did try other significance levels besides 0.01,
but all results showed the same trend.
4.2

EEG BRAIN DATA

In our second experiment, we attempted to learn a
DBCM of the causal propagation of alpha waves, an
8-12 Hz signal that typically occurs in the human brain
when the subject is in a waking state with eyes closed.
Subjects were asked to close their eyes and then an
EEG measurement was recorded. The data consisted
of 10 subjects and a multivariate time series of 19 variables was recorded for each subject 2 , containing over
200,000 time steps at a sampling rate of 256 Hz. Each
variable corresponds to a brain region using the standard 10-20 convention for placement of the electrodes
on the human scalp.
Alpha rhythms are known to operate in a specific frequency band peaking at 10 Hz. To focus our results
more on this process, we tried learning a DBCM using just the 10 Hz power signal over time. We divided
the data into 0.5s segments, performed a FFT on that
segment and extracted the power of the 10 Hz bin for
each time slice. When learning the DBCM, we used
the same significance level and kmax as before. The
result for subject 10 is displayed in Figure 3. The circles represent the 19 variables that correspond to the
brain regions. The top of this graph represents the
front of the brain and the bottom the back. The small
squares in each circle represent the derivatives that
were found. The lower left is the original EEG signal,
the lower right the first derivative, the top right the
second derivative, and the top left the third derivative. In some regions, no derivatives were detected, so
those squares have been left out.
Here (and in typical subjects) there are only a few
regions that required derivatives to explain their variation. The locations of those regions varied quite a bit
from subject to subject, but there were some common
patterns. Across all subjects, 16 of 20 occipital regions
had at least one derivative present. This contrasts to
the frontal lobes where across all subjects only 1 of 70
frontal regions had one derivative or more. When a
region had at least one derivative, rarely, if ever, did
2
Data available at http://www.causality.inf.ethz.ch
/repository.php?id=17

5

Figure 3: Output of DBCL on data filtered for alpha
wave power.

it also have an incoming edge from some region that
did not have a derivative. This suggests that the regions containing the dynamic processes were the primary drivers of alpha-wave activity. Since most of
these drivers occurred in the occipital lobes, this is
consistent with the widely accepted view that alpha
waves originate from the visual cortex.
There were many regions that did not require any
derivatives to explain their signals. The alpha wave
activity in these regions is quickly (< 0.5s) determined
given the state of the generating regions. One hypothesis to explain this is given by Gòmez-Herrero et al.
[2008] where they point out that conductivity of the
skull can have significant impact on EEG readings by
causing local signals to be a superposition of readings
across the brain. Thus, if the readings of alpha waves
detected in, say, the frontal region of the brain is due
merely to conductivity of the skull, we would have effectively instantaneous determination of the alpha signal in those regions given the value in the regions generating the alpha waves.
We should note that when DBCL is applied to the
raw (unfiltered) data, the resulting DBCM is much less
neat: Most regions have at least one derivative present,
and connectivity among regions is much higher and
more difficult to interpret. This is not surprising given
the massively parallel activity occuring in the brain,
and it suggests that when seeking to learn causal interactions in the brain, it may be useful to partition
brain signals into different frequency bands. We hope
to look more fully into different bands and possibly for
causal interactions among different bands.

DISCUSSION

The main contribution of this work is to present a new
representation for learning models from time-series
data. While DBCMs have been discussed elsewhere in
terms of analyzing causality of dynamic systems, there
has not as yet been an algorithm to learn them from
data. This paper presents such an algorithm and, in
the process, makes DBCMs accessible to a wide range
of practitioners in econometrics, biology and AI who
currently rely on Granger causality, vector autoregression or graphical models to model dynamic systems.
We have argued that DBCMs are particularly suited
to learning systems which are based on differential
equations, and have shown empirically that, for such
systems when the relevant derivatives are unknown,
DBCL will learn models accurately where existing approaches will fail. We have proven that under common
assumptions DBCL will learn the correct equivalence
class for a DBCM, and have shown that several important feautures of the underlying DBCM are identifiable from this equivalence class, such as the presence
of feedback loops and the set of descendants of integral
variables.
While there exist mathematical dynamic systems that
cannot be written as DBCMs, we believe that systems based on differential equations are ubiquitous in
nature, and, therefore, will be well approximated by
DBCMs. Furthermore, we have argued that there does
not exist a representation that is capable of learning
a finite model of these systems without first finding
the correct latent derivative variables. This is because
marginalizing out latent derivative variables results in
an infinite-order Markov model. Thus our method can
be viewed as contributing to the very hard problem of
discovering latent common causes in difference equation systems.
We have also shown that DBCL can learn parsimonious representations for causal interactions of alpha
waves in human brains that are consistent with previous research. We plan to apply this method to understanding causal pathways in the brain more broadly
using a combination of EEG and MEG brain data.
In general, we find it surprising that after nearly 50
years of developing theories for identification of causes
in econometrics, rarely, if ever, have researchers attempted to apply these theories to even the simplest
dynamic physical systems. We feel that our work thus
exposes a glaring gap in causal discovery and representation, and we hope that by reversing that process—
applying a representation that works well on known
mechanical systems to more complicated biological,
econometric and AI systems—we can make new inroads to causal understanding in these disciplines.

Acknowledgments
Marek Druzdzel was supported in part by the National
Institute of Health under grant number U01HL10106601. We would like to the thank the anonymous reviewers for their useful feedback.

References
Gregory F. Cooper and Edward Herskovits.
A
Bayesian method for the induction of probabilistic
networks from data. Machine Learning, 9(4):309–
347, 1992.
Denver Dash. Caveats for Causal Reasoning with Equilibrium Models. PhD thesis, Intelligent Systems
Program, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA,
April 2003.
Denver Dash. Restructuring dynamic causal systems
in equilibrium. In AIStats, pages 81–88. Society for
Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2005.
Michael Eichler and Vanessa Didelez. Causal reasoning
in graphical time series models. In UAI, pages 109–
116, Corvallis, Oregon, 2007. AUAI Press.
Robert E. Engle and Clive W.J. Granger. Cointegration and error-correction: Representation, estimation, and testing. Econometrica, 55(2):251–276,
March 1987.
Nir Friedman. The Bayesian structural EM algorithm.
In UAI, pages 129–138, San Francisco, CA, 1998.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
Nir Friedman, Kevin Murphy, and Stuart Russell.
Learning the structure of dynamic probabilistic networks. In UAI, pages 139–147. Morgan Kaufmann,
1998.
D. Geiger and D. Heckerman. Learning Gaussian networks. Technical report, Microsoft Research, 1994.
Available as Technical Report MSR-TR-94-10.
Germán Gòmez-Herrero, Mercedes Atienza, Karen
Egiazarian, and Jose L. Cantero. Measuring directional coupling between EEG sources. NeuroImage,
43:497–508, July 2008.
Clive W.J. Granger. Investigating causal relations
by econometric models and cross-spectral methods.
Econometrica, 37(3):424–438, July 1969.
Yumi Iwasaki and Herbert A. Simon. Causality and
model abstraction. Artificial Intelligence, 67(1):143–
194, May 1994.
Judea Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK,
2000.
Judea Pearl. Evidential reasoning using stochastic simulation of causal models. Artifical Intelligence, 32:
245–257, 1987.

Judea Pearl and Thomas S. Verma. A theory of inferred causation. In KR, pages 441–452, Cambridge,
MA, 1991. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., San
Mateo, CA.
K. Sachs, O. Perez, D. Pe’er, D. Lauffenburger, and
G. Nolan. Causal protein-signaling networks derived
from multiparameter single-cell data. Science, 308:
523–529, April 2005.
Christopher Sims.
Macroeconomics and reality.
Econometrica, 48:113–144, January 1980.
Peter Spirtes, Clark Glymour, and Richard Scheines.
Causation, prediction, and search. Springer Verlag,
New York, NY, USA, second edition, 2000.
Robert H. Strotz and H.O.A. Wold. Recursive vs. nonrecursive systems: An attempt at synthesis; Part I
of a triptych on causal chain systems. Econometrica,
28(2):417–427, April 1960.

APPENDIX: PROOFS
Theorem 1 (detecting prime variables). Let I be the
set of conditional independence relations implied by
faithfulness applied to a DBCM M = hV , E i with
V = V 0 ∪ V 1 and E = E 0 ∪ E 1 . Let ∆j X 1 denote the j-th order difference of some X 1 ∈ V 1 . Then
∆j X 1 is the prime variable of X 1 if and only if it is
d-separated from itself in the future and none of the
lower order differences can be d-separated, i.e.:
1. there exists a W
⊂
V1
j 0
j 1
(∆ X ⊥
⊥ ∆ X | W ) ∈ I, and

such

that

2. there exists no set W 0 ⊂ V 1 such that
(∆k X 0 ⊥
⊥ ∆k X 1 | W 0 ) ∈ I, for all k < j.
Proof. The Markov and faithfulness conditions together imply that an edge exists between any two variables A and B in the model if and only if there exists
no set W such that (A ⊥
⊥ B | W ). In a DBCM model,
an edge exists across time slices from a difference variable A0 → A1 iff A is an integral variable. Thus, the
first difference variable for which there is no edge must
be the prime variable, and Conditions 1 and 2 follow
from the Markov and Faithfulness conditions.
Theorem 2 (learning contemporaneous structure).
Let I be the set of conditional independence relations implied by faithfulness applied to a DBCM M =
hV , E i, where V = V 0 ∪ V 1 . There is an edge
X 1 − Y 1 if and only if:
1. Either X 1 or Y 1 is not an integral variable, and
1

2. there exists no V 0 ⊂ V 1 \ {X 1 , Y 1 } such that
1
(X 1 ⊥
⊥ Y 1 | V 0 ) ∈ I.

Proof. ⇒ Condition 1 follows from the definition of
DBCMs: an integral variable is never connected to
another integral variable in a given time slice. Condition 2 follows from the Faithfulness condition. Faithfulness states that an independence relation implies a
d-separation in the graph. Therefore the contrapositive states that a conection in the graph implies no
conditional independence relation exists when conditioning over any subset of V \ {X 1 , Y 1 }.
⇐ Assume there exists no conditional independence
1
relation (X 1 ⊥
⊥ Y 1 | V 0 ) ∈ I. We prove by contradiction that there must be an edge X 1 −Y 1 . Assume there
is no such edge. Then by the Markov condition there
exists some set V 0 ⊂ V such that (X 1 ⊥
⊥ Y 1 | V 0) ∈
1
I. Let V∆ be the set of integral variables in time slice
1. According to the Markov condition, conditioning on
these variables renders V 0 independent of V 1 . Thus,
the set {V 0 ∪ V∆1 } ∩ {V 1 \ {X 1 , Y 1 }} ⊂ V 1 will also
render X 1 independent from Y 1 , which contradicts our
original assumption. Therefore, there must be an edge
X 1 − Y 1.
Theorem 3. Let D be a DBCM with a variable X
that has a prime variable Prime(X). The partially
directed graph returned by Algorithm 1 with a perfect
independence oracle will have an edge between X and
Prime(X) if and only if X is self-regulating.
Proof. Follows by the correctness of the structure discovery algorithm (all adjacencies in the graph will be
recovered) together with the definition of DBCMs (no
contemporaneous edge can be oriented into an integral
variable).
Theorem 4. Let G be the contemporaneous graph of a
DBC model. Then for a variable X in G, Fb(X) = ∅
if and only if for each undirected path P between X and
Prime(X), there exists a v-structure Pi → Pj ← Pk in
G such that {Pi , Pj , Pk } ⊂ P .
Proof. ⇒ Assume Fb(X) = ∅. Let P be an arbitrary
path P = P0 → P1 − P2 − . . . − Pn − Pn+1 with P0 =
X and Pn+1 = Prime(X), and let k be the number
of cross-path colliders on that path. The path must
have at least one (cross-path) collider, otherwise there
will be a directed path from X to Prime(X) which
contradicts the fact that Fb(X) = ∅. If at least one
of the cross-path colliders is unshielded the theorem
is satisfied, so we only have to consider the case of
shielded colliders. Now let Pi → Pj ← Pk be the
first shielded cross-path collider (such that j is the
smallest). We consider three cases:
1. i < j < k: There is a directed path from X to
Pi since it is the first collider. Therefore, there
can be no edge from Pk to Pi , because that would

create a collider in Pi (and Pj would not be the
first). So there must be an edge from Pi to Pk
and this implies there is a directed path from X
to Pk and we recurse and look for the first shielded
cross-path collider after Pk .
2. i, k < j: Without loss of generality, there is a
path X → . . . → Pi → . . . → Pk → . . . → Pj , and
edges Pi → Pj , Pk → Pj , and Pi − Pk . If Pi ← Pk
then there would be a collider in Pi which contradicts that Pj is the first one. Therefore, there
must be an edge Pi → Pk and this implies there is
a directed path from X to Pj and we recurse and
find the first shielded cross-path collider after Pj .
3. j < i, k: Without loss of generality, there is a
path X → . . . → Pj . . . Pi . . . Pk , and edges Pj ←
Pi and Pj ← Pk . This results in two cross-path
colliders in Pj . Now there are two possibilities,
(a) they are both shielded which creates a directed
path from X to Pk and we recurse like before, or
(b) at least one cross-path collider is unshielded
and resulting in the sought after v-structure.
Since there are only k cross-path colliders, case 1, 2,
and 3a reduce the number of colliders towards zero. If
there are no cross-path colliders left, there is a directed
path from X to Prime(X) which contradicts our assumption that Fb(X) = ∅. Therefore, eventually we
must encounter case 3b and that proves it one way.
⇐ Assume all undirected paths between X and
Prime(X) have such a v-structure. We prove by contradiction that there does not exist a directed path
from X to Prime(X). Assume that Fb(X) 6= ∅
and so there must be a path P = X → P1 →
. . . → Prime(X), and assume it contains m such vstructures. Now let Pi → Pj ← Pk be the first vstructure (such that j is the smallest). We consider:
1. i > j: There is a path Pj → . . . → Pi and also
an edge Pi → Pj resulting in a cycle which is a
contradiction.
2. k > j: Analogous to the first case.
3. i, k < j: Without loss of generality, assume that
there is a path X → . . . → Pi → . . . → Pk →
. . . → Pj →, and edges Pi → Pj and Pk → Pj .
So there is a directed path from X to Pj without
a v-structure and we recurse to find the first vstructure after Pj .
Since there are only m cross-path colliders, eventually
there will be a path with no colliders left. Since this
path contains no v-structures, it contradicts the fact
that all paths must have a v-structure and, therefore,
Fb(X) = ∅.

