402

MESHI ET AL.

UAI 2009

Convexifying the Bethe Free Energy

Ofer Meshi

Ariel Jaimovich

Amir Globerson

Nir Friedman

School of Computer Science and Engineering
Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel 91904
{meshi,arielj,gamir,nir}@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract
The introduction of loopy belief propagation
(LBP) revitalized the application of graphical
models in many domains. Many recent works
present improvements on the basic LBP algorithm in an attempt to overcome convergence and
local optima problems. Notable among these
are convexified free energy approximations that
lead to inference procedures with provable convergence and quality properties. However, empirically LBP still outperforms most of its convex variants in a variety of settings, as we also
demonstrate here. Motivated by this fact we
seek convexified free energies that directly approximate the Bethe free energy. We show that
the proposed approximations compare favorably
with state-of-the art convex free energy approximations.

1

Introduction

Computing likelihoods and marginal probabilities is a critical subtask in applications of graphical models. As computing the exact answers is often infeasible, there is a growing need for approximate inference methods. An important
class of approximations are variational methods [7] that
pose inference in terms of minimizing the free energy functional. In the last decade, loopy belief propagation (LBP), a
simple local message passing procedure, proved to be empirically successful and was used in a variety of applications [10]. The seminal work of Yedidia et al. [20] merged
these lines of work by formulating loopy belief propagation
in terms of optimizing the Bethe free energy, an approximate free energy functional.
LBP suffers from two inherent problems: it fails to converge in some cases, and may converge to local optima due
to the non-convexity of the Bethe free energy. Several approaches have been introduced to fix the non-convergence
issue, so that LBP provably converges to a local optimum
of the Bethe free energy [17, 22]. However, this still leaves

the problem of local optima, and therefore the dependence
of the solution on initial conditions. To alleviate this problem, several works [2, 6, 13, 15] construct convex free energy approximations, for which there is a single global optimum. Convexity also paved the way for the introduction of
provably convergent message-passing algorithms for calculating likelihood and marginal probabilities [3, 4]. Moreover, some of these approximations provide upper bounds
on the partition function [2, 13].
Despite their algorithmic elegance and convergence
properties, convex variants often do not provide better empirical results than LBP. While this observation is shared
by many practitioners, it does not have firm theoretical justification. Motivated by this observation, our goal in this
work is to construct approximations that are both convex
and directly approximate the Bethe free energy. We show
how to approximate the Bethe in L2 norm and how to find
the best upper bound on it for a given random field. We
then illustrate the utility of our proposed approximations
by comparing them to previously suggested ones across a
variety of models and parameterizations.

2

Free Energy Approximations

Probabilistic graphical models provide a succinct language
to specify complex joint probabilities over many variables.
This is done by factorizing the distribution into a product
over local potentials. Let x ∈ X n denote a vector of n discrete random variables. Here we focus on Markov Random
Fields where the joint probability is given by:
(
)
X
X
1
p(x; θ ) =
exp
θα (xα ) +
θi (xi )
(1)
Z(θθ )
α
i
where α correspond to subsets of parameters (or factors),
and Z(θθ ) is the partition function that serves to normalize the distribution. We denote marginal distributions over
variables and factors by µi (xi ) and µα (xα ), respectively,
and the vector of all marginals by µ.
Given such a model, we are interested in computing the
marginal probabilities µ , as well as the partition function

UAI 2009

MESHI ET AL.

Z(θθ ), which is required for calculating the likelihood of evidence, especially in the context of parameter estimation.
Finding exact answers for these tasks is theoretically and
practically hard and thus many works often resort to approximate inference.
A class of popular approximate inference approaches
are the variational methods that rely on the following exact formulation of log Z(θθ ) [14]:
n
o
µ)
(2)
log Z(θθ ) =
max θ T µ + H(µ
µ ∈M(G)

The set M(G) is known as the marginal polytope associated with a graph G [14]. A vector µ is in M(G) if it
corresponds to the marginals of some distribution p(x):


µi (xi ) = p(xi )
M(G) = µ ∃p(x) s.t.
(3)
µα (xα ) = p(xα )
µ) is defined as the entropy of the unique exponential
H(µ
distribution of the form in Eq. (1) consistent with marginals
µ . Finally, the objective in Eq. (2) is the negative of the free
µ, θ ].
energy functional, denoted F [µ
The solution to the optimization problem in Eq. (2) is
precisely the desired vector of marginals of the distribution
p(x; θ ).
In itself, this observation is not sufficient to provide an
efficient algorithm, since the maximization in Eq. (2) is as
hard as the original inference task. Specifically, M(G) is
µ) is
difficult to characterize and the computation of H(µ
also intractable, so both need to be approximated. First,
one can relax the optimization problem to be over an outer
bound on the marginal polytope. In particular, it is natural
to require that the resulting pseudo-marginals obey some
local normalization and marginalization constraints. These
constraints define the local polytope
P


xi µi (xi ) = 1
P
µ
L(G) =
≥0
(4)
xα \xi µα (xα ) = µi (xi )
As for the entropy term, a family of entropy approximations with a long history in statistical physicsPis based on a
µ) = r cr Hr (µr ),
weighted sum of local entropies Hc (µ
where r are subsets of variables (regions) and the coefficients cr are called counting numbers [21]. The approximate optimization problem then takes the form:
n
o
µ)
log Z̃(θθ ) = max θ T µ + Hc (µ
(5)
µ ∈L(G)

The entropy approximation is defined both by the choice
of regions and by the choice of counting numbers. This
poses two complementary challenges: defining the regions,
and assigning counting numbers for these regions. Here we
focus on the second problem, which arises for any choice
of regions. For simplicity, we limit ourselves to a common
choice of regions — over variables and factors, although

403
the results to follow can be generalized to more elaborate
region choices (e.g., [16, 18]). In this case the approximate
entropy takes the form:
µ) =
Hc (µ

X

ci Hi (µi ) +

X

cα Hα (µα )

(6)

α

i

where ci and cα are the counting numbers for variables and
factors, respectively.
Each set of counting numbers will result in a different
µ)
approximation. The Bethe entropy approximation Hb (µ
is defined by choosing cα = 1, ci = 1 − di (where di =
|{α : i ∈ α}|) [21].
Concave Entropy Approximations
One shortcoming of the Bethe entropy is that it is not concave, and thus Eq. (5) may have local optima. It is possible
to consider instead entropy approximations that are provably concave. Such approximations have been studied extensively in recent years, along with provable convergent
algorithms for solving Eq. (5) in these cases. One of the
first concave entropy approximations introduced was the
tree-reweighting (TRW) method of Wainwright et al.[13].
The TRW entropy approximation is a convex combination
of tree entropies and is concave. Furthermore, it is an upµ) so that the optimum of Eq. (5)
per bound on the true H(µ
yields an upper bound on log Z(θθ ).
More recently, Heskes [5] derived a set of sufficient condition for cα , ci to yield a concave function. He showed
µ) is provably concave
that an entropy approximation Hc (µ
for µ ∈ L(G) if there exist auxiliary counting numbers
cαα , cii , ciα ≥ 0 such that
cα

= cαα +

X

ciα

∀α

(7)

ciα

∀i

(8)

i:i∈α

ci

= cii −

X
α:i∈α

3

Message Passing Algorithms

The optimization problem in Eq. (5) can be solved using
generic optimization tools. However, message passing algorithms have proved especially useful for this task. Starting with the work of Yedidia et al.[20] many message passing algorithms have been proposed for optimizing variational approximations. Although not all these algorithms
are provably convergent, if they do converge, it is to a fixed
µ) is conpoint of Eq. (5). Furthermore if the entropy Hc (µ
cave, this is the global optimum of Eq. (5).
Most existing algorithms make the assumption that
cα = 1. Since in this work we want to explore a broader
range of approximations, we derive message passing updates for the more general case (for any cα 6= 0). Our
derivation, which follows closely the one of Yedidia et al.,
results with the following update rules:

404

MESHI ET AL.

UAI 2009
that these models are optimized correctly? It is easy to see
that if c satisfies:
X
ci +
cα = 1
∀i
(11)
α,i∈α

µ) will solve the factorized
then the corresponding Hc (µ
model exactly. We call c values that obey Eq. (11) variableµ) [21].
valid, as the variables are counted correctly in Hc (µ
In a similar way we can define factor-valid approximations that satisfy:
Figure 1: Illustration of the counting number space with different
regions and point of interest labeled (see text).

mα→i (xi )
ni→α (xi )
Where qi =

cα

qi −cα

qi −1
cα −qi +1

1
cα −qi +1

= m0α→i (xi ) cα −qi +1 n0i→α (xi ) cα −qi +1
= m0α→i (xi )
1−ci
di

m0α→i (xi )

n0i→α (xi )

(10)

and:

=

X

1

e cα θα (xα )

xα \xi

n0i→α (xi )

(9)

= eθi (xi )

Y

nj→α (xj )

j ∈α
j 6= i

Y

mβ→i (xi )

β :i∈β
β 6= α

Note that by plugging in the Bethe counting numbers,
where cα = 1 and ci = 1 − di , this reduces back to the
standard BP messages. Furthermore, if we set cα = 1 as in
Yedidia et al. [21], then Eq. (9) and Eq. (10) reduce to the
two-way algorithm defined there.
The above updates are not guaranteed to converge even
µ) is concave. However, we have found that with
if Hc (µ
dampening of messages it did converge for all the cases we
studied.

4

Properties of Counting Number Space

Given a specific model, different choices of counting numbers lead to different entropy approximations. But what
are good counting numbers and how can we find those for
a specific model?
One desirable property of counting numbers is that they
result in concave entropies, as discussed in Section 2.
There are several rationales for choosing those. One is
clearly that optimization is globally optimal. The other is
µ) is itself concave [14].
that the true entropy H(µ
Another approach to deriving good counting numbers is
µ)
to restrict ourselves to c such that optimization with Hc (µ
is exact for at least some values of θ . For example, suppose
we have a model where θα (xα ) = 0 for all α (i.e., a completely factorized model). How should we constrain c such

cα = 1

∀α

(12)

Intuitively, approximations that satisfy both Eq. (11) and
Eq. (12) are valid [21] as they have the appealing property of not over- or under-counting variables and factors
µ). Furthermore, for tree
in the approximate entropy Hc (µ
structured distributions it has been shown that only valid
counting numbers can yield exact results [11].
Figure 1 illustrates the structure of the above constraints
in the space of counting numbers. Note that the Bethe approximation is the single choice of counting numbers that
is both factor- and variable-valid. The TRW approximation
is, by definition, always variable-valid, and any distribution
over spanning trees results in a different value of cα . Finally, we note that for different model structures the counting number space looks different. For example, the Bethe
approximation for tree structured distributions is convex.
To better understand the properties of different counting
numbers, we perform an experiment where the counting
number space is two dimensional and can be visualized.
For this we use 5 × 5 toroidal grids in which each variable
is connected to four neighboring variables by pairwise factors. The joint probability n
distribution of the model is given
o
P
P
1
by: p(x; θ ) = Z(θ
exp
i θ i xi +
(i,j)∈G θi,j xi xj
θ)
with xi , xj ∈ {±1}. The field parameters θi were drawn
uniformly from the range [−ωF , ωF ], and the interaction parameters θi,j were drawn either from the range
[−ωI , ωI ] or from [0, ωI ] to obtain mixed or attractive potentials respectively [2, 13]. This model structure has inherent symmetry as all factors are pairwise and each variable
appears in exactly four factors. Hence, if we choose the
counting numbers of the approximation based solely on the
structure of the model, we get the same ci for all variables
and the same cα for all factors.
Figure 2 shows the performance of various approximations on two models. The first model is sampled in an easy
regime with relatively weak interaction parameters while
the second model is sampled from a more difficult regime
with stronger interaction parameters.
We observe that most convex free energy approximations have large errors both in the estimate of the logpartition and in that of the marginal beliefs. When looking at subspaces that tend to empirically perform better

UAI 2009

MESHI ET AL.

405

Figure 2: Quality of different approximations for two instances of the 5 × 5 toroidal grid from different parametric scenarios. In each
matrix the x-axis denotes the counting number for nodes (ci ) and the y-axis denotes the counting number for edges of the grid (cα ).
Each pixel in the matrix is the result of running belief propagation with these counting numbers. The subspace of provably convex
approximations is bound by solid lines, and the variable-valid subspace is marked by a dotted line. The left column shows the error in
approximate log-partition function (| log Z(θθ ) − log Z̃(θθ ) |), the middle column shows the average L1 error in approximate marginals
over factors and variables. The rightmost column shows in more detail the approximation quality in the variable-valid subspace. The
colored stars show various approximations (see Figure 1 and text).

than others, the convex subspace does not seem to generally give good approximations. However, we notice that
variable-valid approximations stand out as the main region of relatively low error. In fact, we note that to the
best of our knowledge all free energy approximations suggested in the literature obey this variable-valid constraint
[2, 4, 13, 19, 21].
The rightmost column of Figure 2 shows performance
of variable-valid approximations. We notice that for almost all models tested the approximation improves as the
counting numbers get closer to the Bethe counting numbers. However, in most cases the Bethe approximation
outperforms its convex counterparts. We obtained similar
results for fully connected graphs and other non-pairwise
models (not shown).

of the model, and adaptive approximations that also take
the model parameters into account.
5.1

Static Approximations

Following the insights of the previous section, it is natural
to try to combine the convexity constraints of Eq. (7) and
Eq. (8) with the validity constraints defined by Eq. (11).
Inside this subspace, a straightforward choice is to find the
counting numbers that are closest in terms of Euclidean distance to the Bethe counting numbers. For clarity we denote
by b the vector of Bethe counting numbers with bi = 1−di
and bα = 1. We define the convexBethe-c approximation
as the solution to the optimization problem
2

argmin kc − bk

(13)

c

5

Approximating Bethe

The experiments in the previous section demonstrate that
the Bethe free energy performs well across a variety of parameter settings. Since we would like to work with convex
free energies, a key question is which of the convex free
energies comes closest to the performance of Bethe.
In what follows, we describe several approaches to obtaining counting numbers that satisfy the above requirements. We divide these into static approximations that determine the counting numbers based only on the structure

s.t. ci , cα satisfy Eq. (7,8,11).
This constrained optimization problem can be formulated
as a quadratic program and solved using standard solvers.
A similar approach was recently studied by Hazan and
Shashua [4].
However, it is not clear that the L2 metric in counting
number space is adequate for approximating Bethe. In principle we would like to approximate the Bethe entropy itself
µ) is a funcrather than its counting numbers. Since Hb (µ
µ) that is
tion of µ we would like to find a function Hc (µ

406

MESHI ET AL.

UAI 2009

Figure 3: Comparison of estimation errors the partition function (left column) and the marginal probabilities (right column) for several
approximation schemes. In the first row we take ωF = 0.05 and attractive potentials, and in the second row ωF = 1 and mixed
potentials. In each graph the x-axis corresponds to the interaction meta-parameters ωI , and the y-axis shows the error in the log partition
estimation (left column) and marginal estimation (right column). Each line describes the average errors over 20 5 × 5 grid models
sampled with the corresponding meta-parameters. The TRW approximation in this graph corresponds to the uniform distribution over
four spanning trees.

closest to it when integrating over all µ values. We can put
this formally as:
Z
µ) − Hc (µ
µ))2 dµ
µ
argmin
(Hb (µ
(14)
c

L(G)

s.t. ci , cα satisfy Eq. (7,8).
We integrate over L(G) since this is the optimization range
in Eq. (5) and thus the relevant domain of approximation.
Although this integration seems daunting, we can simplify
µ) and Hc (µ
µ) can be
the problem by noticing that Hb (µ
written as bT Hµ and cT Hµ respectively, where Hµ is
the vector of local entropies. This results in the following
quadratic optimization problem:
argmin(b − c)T A(b − c)

(15)

c

s.t. ci , cα satisfy Eq. (7,8).
where

Z
A=

µ
Hµ HµT dµ

L(G)

is the matrix of integration of all pairwise products of local entropy terms. Exact calculation of A is intractable
and so we resort to MCMC methods1 , by performing a random walk inside L(G). Starting with a random point inside
1
Volume computations over such polytopes are generally difficult, but in some special cases may be solved in closed form [8].

L(G) (i.e., a set of consistent marginals µ ) we sample a legal direction, find the two boundaries along this direction,
and then sample uniformly a new point from within the
bounded interval. A straightforward argument shows that
the stationary distribution of this walk is uniform within
L(G). To determine when the random walk is close to the
stationary distribution, we apply a heuristic convergence
test by running in parallel several chains from different random starting points and comparing their statistics [1]. Once
we determine convergence, we then use samples from the
different runs to estimate A. Finally, we solve the optimization problem in Eq. (15) with and without enforcing
the variable-valid constraints of Eq. (11), and term these
approximations convexBethe-µvv and convexBethe-µ , respectively.
We evaluate the quality of these approximations for calculating the marginals and partition function in 5 × 5 nontoroidal grids with various parameterizations. We compare their performance with the Bethe approximation and
the TRW approximation using a uniform distribution over
four spanning trees (see [13]) 2 . Following Wainwright et
al. [13], in each trial we set ωF to a fixed value and gradually increase the interaction strength ωI . For each com2
We also used uniform TRW weights over all spanning trees
and got similar results (not shown).

UAI 2009

MESHI ET AL.

407

Figure 4: Comparison of estimation errors in partition function and marginals of the adaptive free energy approximations. The experimental setting is similar to that of Figure 3.

bination of ωF and ωI we sample 20 random models and
measure the estimation errors of each approximation (see
Figure 3).
We first observe that the Bethe approximation outperforms its convex counterparts in terms of partition function approximation under all settings. However we see
that when the field meta-parameter is small (ωF = 0.05)
and the interaction meta-parameter is large (ωI ≥ 0.8),
the convex approximations do better than Bethe in terms
of marginal probabilities estimates. These results are consistent with previous studies [2, 4, 13].
Among the convex free energies optimal L2 approximation of the Bethe free energy (convexBethe-µ ) does better
than optimal L2 approximation of the Bethe counting numbers (convexBethe-c ) in most of the range of parameters.
convexBethe-µ does not perform well in the low interaction regime (small ωI ). This is presumably due to the fact
that it is not forced to be variable-valid, and thus will not
be exact for independent (or close to independent) models.
When averaging across all parameter settings,
convexBethe-µ yields the best performance among
the convex approximations. We conclude that if one seeks
a convex c that performs across a range of parameters, it is
advantageous to approximate the Bethe entropy function
rather than its counting numbers. However, this comes at
a price of lower approximation quality in some regimes.
Regarding computation time, both heuristics require extra
calculations. We note however, that as the computation
does not depend on the model parameters, these extra cal-

culations need to be performed only once for each model
structure. Once the counting numbers are determined, the
optimization of the approximate free energy is exactly the
same as in standard BP. In addition, the performance of the
convexBethe-µ approximation depends on the quality of
the estimation of the matrix A in Eq. (15). This introduces
a trade-off between the cost of the MCMC simulation and
the quality of the approximation, which can be controlled
by the MCMC convergence threshold.
5.2

Adaptive Approximations

The approximations we examined so far were based on the
structure of the model alone, and were not tuned to its parameters. Intuitively, a good approximation should assign
more weight to “stronger” interactions than to weaker ones.
Indeed, Wainwright et al. [13], introduce a method for finding the optimal weights in TRW (denoted TRW-opt). The
µ) and
TRW entropy upper bounds the true entropy H(µ
thus the corresponding variational approximation in Eq. (5)
results in an upper-bound on the true partition function.
Wainwright et al. thus seek counting numbers that minimize this upper bound.
Here we present a different and simpler approach for
adaptively setting the counting numbers. As in the previous section, our motivation is to approximate the performance of the Bethe approximation via convex free energies. One strategy for doing so is to consider only c where
µ) ≥ Hb (µ
µ). This implies that the optimum in Eq. (5)
Hc (µ
will always upper bound the Bethe optimum. To come as
close as possible to the Bethe optimum, we can then min-

408

MESHI ET AL.

UAI 2009

Figure 5: Comparison of partition function and marginal probabilities estimates for several free energy approximations. In each panel
the x-axis spans values of ωF and the y-axis spans values of ωI (attractive setting). Each pixel shows the difference between average
absolute errors over 20 random trials for these meta-parameters. That is, red pixels show parameterizations where the error of the first
approximation is larger, and blue pixels show parameterizations where the error of the second approximation is larger.

imize the optimum of Eq. (5) over the counting numbers
c.
How can we constrain c to upper bound the Bethe free
energy? It turns out that there is a simple condition on c
that achieves this, as we show next.

µ, θ ] be free energy approximation
Proposition 5.2: Let F̃c [µ
µ, θ ] is:
with c ∈ Cvv . The subgradient of maxµ F̃c [µ

Proposition 5.1: If c ∈ Cvv then the difference between the
approximate free energies can be written as:

µ, θ ].
where µ ∗ maximizes F̃c [µ

µ) − Hb (µ
µ) =
Hc (µ

X

(1 − cα )Iα (µα )

α

Where
Cvv is the variable-valid subspace and Iα (µα ) =
P
H
i∈α i (µi )−Hα (µα ) is the multi-information of the distribution µα (see also [9]).
Since Iα (µα ) ≥ 0 always holds, we get that if cα ≤ 1 for
µ) is an upper bound on the Bethe entropy.
all α, then Hc (µ
This property is not only sufficient but also necessary if we
want to find counting numbers for which the bound holds
regardless of µ . Note that the TRW counting numbers satisfy this constraint and thus the TRW approximation is also
an upper bound on the Bethe free energy. Finally, we notice
that due to the convexity constraints (Eq. (7) and Eq. (8))
the resulting entropy approximation is always non-negative
(unlike Bethe).
We now show how to minimize the upper bound on the
Bethe free energy. For this we generalize a result of Wainwright et al.[13]:

µ, θ ]
∂ maxµ F̃c [µ
= −Iα (µ∗α )
∂cα

Given this gradient, we can use a conditional gradient alµ, θ ] over the set
gorithm as in [13] to minimize maxµ F̃c [µ
of c that gives an upper bound on Bethe. Our algorithm is
identical to TRW-opt except for the choice of search direction within the conditional gradient algorithm. In TRW-opt
this involves finding a maximum weighted spanning tree
while in our case it involves solving a LP (argminc −cT I
subject to the constraints). We denote the result of this optimization process by convexBethe-u . Empirically we find
that this method is faster than the TRW iterative optimization algorithm and requires less calls to the inference procedure. More importantly, while finding the optimal counting
numbers in TRW is computationally hard for non-pairwise
models [14], our method is naturally applicable in the more
general setting.
To evaluate the above adaptive strategy, we compare it
with the convexBethe-c approximation and with the Bethe
approximation in the same setting we used for the static approximations (see Figure 4). In addition, Since the choice
of the field meta-parameter ωF greatly influences the relative performance of the approximation we conduct experiments to better understand its role. Instead of fixing the

UAI 2009

MESHI ET AL.

field meta-parameter and varying the coupling strength we
plot a two-dimensional map where both meta-parameters
are free to change (see Figure 5).
As we can see in Figure 4 both adaptive heuristics improve on the static ones. Moreover, our convexBethe-u
procedure is often more accurate than TRW-opt. Yet, both
adaptive methods are still inferior to Bethe approximation
for most models we tested, except for the particular regions
we discuss above. More extensive comparison for different choices of parameters (Figure 5) reinforces the observation that the accuracy of the approximations differ under various model parameters. This suggests that given the
model structure, there is no single “best” choice of counting numbers which is better under all parametric settings.
We do see, however, that the Bethe approximation gives
better or equivalent estimates of the log-partition function
compared to the convex approximations (negative values
in the map) except for the region with a very weak field
meta-parameter (ωF ≈ 0) and a strong interaction metaparameter (ωI > 1.5). Furthermore, we see that the advantage of convex approximations over Bethe in marginals
estimation is also in the region where ωF is weak and ωI is
strong.
To examine the generality of these observations, we repeated the experiments described here for models with a
structure of fully connected graph over 10 nodes (see Appendix A). These dense models differ from the sparse grid
structured models, yet we get very similar results. We also
conducted similar experiments for smaller and larger grids
(see Appendix A) and for models with non-pairwise potentials (not shown), again with very similar results. We therefore believe that the conclusions we draw here are valid for
a wide range of models.

6

Discussion

The study of convex free energies was originally motivated
by the realization that loopy belief propagation was optimizing the non-convex Bethe free energy. It thus set out to
alleviate the non-convexity problem in the Bethe optimization procedure, and indeed has resulted in elegant algorithmic message-passing solutions for convex free energies.
Another interesting application of convex free-energies was
for optimizing Bethe (or Kikuchi) free energies via sequences of local convex approximations [6]. Although this
resulted in faster optimization, it still inherited the localoptima problem of the Bethe optimization. More recently,
convex free energy variants were shown to be particularly
useful in the context of model selection [12].
Despite these merits, in terms of quality of the approximation, convex free energies are still often not competitive
with Bethe and in fact result in poorer performance over
a wide range of parameter settings, as we also show here.
This leads to the natural question, which we address in this
work: what is the best convex approximation to the Bethe

409
free energy?
As we have shown, there are several approaches to this
problem, depending on whether we seek a set of counting
numbers that is independent of the model parameters, or
one that can be tuned adaptively. Our results show that
convex Bethe approximations often work better than other
schemes. For example, the counting numbers that approximate the Bethe entropy in L2 norm across all µ values often
work better than other choices. Furthermore, our adaptive
strategy for choosing the best counting numbers for a given
model often works better than other methods such as TRW.
Our adaptive procedures are also easily extendible to nonpairwise regions, unlike TRW which becomes intractable
in these cases.
One might argue that it is more reasonable to directly
µ) rather than the Bethe
approximate the true entropy H(µ
entropy. The main difficulty with this approach is that
µ) is not generally known, and thus its approximations
H(µ
are typically quite loose. For example, it is not clear how
to go about approximating it in L2 norm, as we do for
Bethe here. The Bethe free energy, on the other hand, is
tractable and as we show can be approximated in various
ways. Thus, even though we lose by not approximating the
true entropy, we gain by obtaining tighter approximations
to the Bethe entropy, which typically provides good performance.
Another conclusion from our results is that variablevalid counting numbers usually outperform non-valid ones.
One possible explanation for this fact is that they are guaranteed to give exact results for independent models. An
interesting open question is what other constraints we can
pose on counting numbers to enforce exactness in different
scenarios, and whether we can optimize over the set of such
numbers.
Acknowledgements
We thank Talya Meltzer, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Raanan Fatal and
Yair Weiss for helpful remarks. This research was supported in
part by a grant from the Israel Science Foundation.

References
[1] A. Gelman and D. B. Rubin. Inference from iterative
simulation using multiple sequences. Statistical Science,
7(4):457–472, 1992.
[2] A. Globerson and T. Jaakkola. Approximate inference using
conditional entropy decompositions. In AISTATS, 2007.
[3] A. Globerson and T. Jaakkola. Convergent propagation algorithms via oriented trees. In UAI, 2007.
[4] T. Hazan and A. Shashua. Convergent message-passing algorithms for inference over general graphs with convex free
energy. In UAI, 2008.
[5] T. Heskes. Convexity arguments for efficient minimization
of the Bethe and Kikuchi free energies. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research, 26:153–190, 2006.
[6] T. Heskes, K. Albers, and B. Kappen. Approximate inference and constrained optimization. In UAI, 2003.

410

MESHI ET AL.

[7] M. I. Jordan, Z. Ghahramani, T. Jaakkola, and L. K. Saul.
An introduction to variational approximations methods for
graphical models. In M. I. Jordan, editor, Learning in
Graphical Models. Kluwer, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1998.
[8] C.W. Ko, J. Lee, and E. Steingrı́msson. The volume of relaxed boolean-quadric and cut polytopes. Discrete Math.,
163(1-3):293–298, 1997.
[9] T.P. Minka. Divergence measures and message passing.
Technical Report MSR-TR-2005-173, Microsoft Research,
2005.
[10] K. Murphy and Y. Weiss. Loopy belief propagation for approximate inference: An empirical study. In UAI, 1999.
[11] P. Pakzad and V. Anantharam. Estimation and marginalization using kikuchi approximation methods. Neural Computation, 17:1836–1873, 2005.
[12] M. J. Wainwright. Estimating the ”wrong” graphical model:
Benefits in the computation-limited setting. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7:1829–1859, 2006.
[13] M. J. Wainwright, T.S. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky. A
new class of upper bounds on the log partition function.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 51(7):2313–
2335, 2005.
[14] M. J. Wainwright and M. I. Jordan. Graphical models, exponential families, and variational inference. Foundations
and Trends in Machine Learning, 1(1–2):1–305, 2008.
[15] Y. Weiss, C. Yanover, and T. Meltzer. Map estimation, linear programming and belief propagation with convex free
energies. In UAI, 2007.
[16] M. Welling. On the choice of regions for generalized belief
propagation. In UAI, 2004.
[17] M. Welling and Y. Teh. Belief optimization for binary networks : A stable alternative to loopy belief propagation. In
UAI, 2001.
[18] W. Wiegerinck. Approximations with reweighted generalized belief propagation. In AISTATS, 2005.
[19] W. Wiegerinck and T. Heskes. Fractional belief propagation. In NIPS, 2003.
[20] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss. Generalized
belief propagation. In NIPS, 2001.
[21] J.S. Yedidia, W.T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss. Constructing
free energy approximations and generalized belief propagation algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
51(7):2282–2312, 2005.
[22] A. Yuille. CCCP algorithms to minimize the bethe and
kikuchi free energies: Convergent alternatives to belief
propagation. Neural Computation, 14:1691–1722, 2002.

UAI 2009

A

Results for other graphs

We show results for adaptive approximations on fully connected graphs over 10 nodes in Figure 6. As can be seen,
results are very similar to those of grids.

Figure 6: Comparison of estimation errors of the adaptive free
energy approximations in the case of fully connected graphs. The
experimental setting is similar to that of Figure 4.

Figure 7 shows similar results for 10 × 10 grids.

Figure 7: Comparison of estimation errors of the adaptive free
energy approximations in the case of 10 × 10 grids. The experimental setting is similar to that of Figure 4.

