VIQI: A New Approach for Visual Interpretation of
Deep Web Query Interfaces
Radhouane Boughammoura

Lobna Hlaoua

Department of Computer Sciences
Faculty of Sciences of Monastir,
Research Unit MARS
Monastir, Tunisia
Radhouane.Boughammoura@gmail.com

Department of Electronic and Computer Science
High School of Sciences and Technology of H.Sousse,
Research Unit MARS
H. Sousse, Tunisia
Lobna1511@yahoo.fr

Mohamed Nazih Omri
Department of Computer Sciences
Faculty of Sciences of Monastir
Research Unit MARS
Monastir, Tunisia
MohamedNazih.Omri@fsm.rnu.tn
Abstract— Deep Web databases contain more than 90% of
pertinent information of the Web. Despite their importance,
users don’t profit of this treasury. Many deep web services are
offering competitive services in term of prices, quality of service,
and facilities. As the number of services is growing rapidly, users
have difficulty to ask many web services in the same time. In this
paper, we imagine a system where users have the possibility to
formulate one query using one query interface and then the
system translates query to the rest of query interfaces. However,
interfaces are created by designers in order to be interpreted
visually by users, machines can not interpret query from a given
interface. We propose a new approach which emulates capacity
of interpretation of users and extracts query from deep web
query interfaces. Our approach has proved good performances
on two standard datasets.
Keywords- Web ;Information Retrieval ; Query Model; Query
Extraction

I.

INTRODUCTION

Deep Web is the part of web hidden behind query
interfaces. Deep Web is growing and changing continuously,
new web services are emerging at a high rate, they offer new
and complementary services to existing ones. For commercial
reason, web services are increasingly competitive. Hence,
users are interested by asking services of many providers at
the same time. However, web services have different query
capabilities, users have to formulate a query for each web
service separately. Moreover, as each web service query has
its own meaning, results will be incoherent.
Classical Information Retrieval process has 4 steps. For
example a student attending NCM 2012 conference in Seoul,
Korea will be interested by flights to Seoul and will proceed as
follows(seefigure1):

This work is supported by research unit MARS, FSM

(1)

(4)

www.expedia.com

(2)

(3)

Database

Figure 1. Classical Information Retrieval Process from deep
Web
(1) he formulates a query using query interface, (2) the query
is submitted to deep Web database, (3) relevant information
are extracted from database and encapsulated into web pages,
(4) finally web pages are returned to users.
We believe it is possible to make web services more
sensitive to user’s needs. The system that we are working on
collects querying capabilities of many web services and
combines them in one query interface. Using this interface,
user can formulate one query and obtains results satisfying his
need from all web services. This interface is generic as it meets
together many services and respects the autonomy of each
service.
Figure 2 show on the left classic information retrieval
process where user search information from each web service
separately. On the right, the generic web service [1,2] where
user formulates only one query, the system translates

Interface 1

Interface 2

Generic

Interfcae n

Interface

…

Data
Base 1

Data
Base 2

…

Data
Base n

Query
Translator

Query
Translator

Interface 1

Interface2

Data
Base 1

Data
Base 2

…

Query
Translator

…

Interface n

…

Data
Base n

(a) Autonomous Web services
(b) Generic Web service
Figure 2. Overview of (a) autonomous web services and (b) unified web services
the query [3,4,5] to each local service and collects relevant
results [16, 17] from all web services at the same time.
Query interfaces are the natural representation of the query
for visual user perception [6, 7]. Although query interfaces are
easily interpreted by users, they are not the query supported
server’s side. Query interfaces are used to map the query to
URL which contains a list of attribute/value pairs. For
example‘http://www.expedia.com/FlightsSearch?trip=’’roundtr
ip’’&leg1=’’from:TUN,to:ICN’’,departure=’’04/24/2012’’...’
is query which aims to find flights from departing city to
destination city. Attribute/value pairs are listed as a sequence:
trip=’’roundtrip’’, leg1=’’from:TUN,to:ICN’’, departure =
‘’04/24/2012’’, etc. URL is the form of the query which is run
by web server. However, users have great difficulty to
interpret and to understand the meaning of such query because
fields are represented by internal names which are
concatenated and abbreviated. So, although query interface
have rich semantic value, web server can not run it, while
URL have poor semantic meaning, but it can be run by web
server.
Then to resolve this challenge, we propose three main
contributions:
1. A new model for query representation: this model
provides matching between elements of query and
elements of query interface.
2. A new approach of query interpretation and
extraction: our approach emulates capacity of users to
interpret query interfaces
3. To evaluate our approach on two standard datasets
Our paper is structured as follows. Section 2 is related
works. We present a new model for query representation
detailed in section 3, which provides matching between
interface and query elements. In Section 4, we describe our
approach to extract query from a given query interface based
on our model of query representation. We evaluate
performance of our approach in section 5. Finally we conclude
and present our future work in section 6.

II.

RELATED WORK

Related works have used two main query representation
models: a flat model and a hierarchical model.
According Madhavan et al [8], flat representation of query
is represented by sequence of attribute/value pairs. This
category of queries cannot be interpreted visually by user.
Hence, users have difficulty to understand the meaning of
query. However, they are indexed by standard search engines
such as Google [9] as static resources.
While flat queries are not understood by users, hierarchical
queries [10,11] are easily interpreted (see figure 2), they
describe visual structure of query interface, i.e. all concepts of
the query and semantic relations between them. As
hierarchical query is not the query but its structure, they are
not indexed by standard search engines. Despite their rich
semantic values, hierarchical queries still unknown.
Approaches of query extraction can be classified in two
categories: Approaches based on visual features [12,13,14],
and approaches based on HTML features [15,16,17].
Visual features include topological relations between
fields, direction, distance, etc. They are detectors of semantic
concepts of query. For example, there is a high probability that
two adjacent (distance and direction) fields form the attributes
of the same concept.
While two fields are adjacent in web page space, they are
too far from each other in HTML script because of HTML tags,
field’s values, etc. HTML based approaches use linguistic
features to extract concepts of the query. For example,
‘departure’ and ‘destination’ are attributes of the same concept
because they are instance of the same linguistic concept ‘City’.
III.

MODEL OF REPRESENTATION OF QUERY

We have chosen to represent query by a hierarchical model
[18] as this model reflects meaning of query (see figure 3).
Concepts of query are rendered in query interface based on a
spatial-locality paradigm: fields which form attributes of the
same
concept
are
close
to
each
other

Interface

Query

root

2
Leaving
From

Going
To

3

Departing
On

Returning
On

Adults Children Infants depDay depMonth retDay

Flight
Class

retMonth

Figure 3. Hierarchical query extracted from query interface (Left)

in the interface and aligned (e.g. ‘Adults’ and ‘Children’),
while fields of different concepts are rarely adjacent and
aligned (e.g. ‘Adults’ and ‘ReturningMonth’).
Based on mapping between visual features and semantic
concepts of the query (see figure 4), we have found the five
components of our model: field, RenderedGroup,
RenderedCollection, NotRenderedGroup, and VisualBox:
-

-

field: this is the basic unit of information composing
the query, it is a query condition aver one attribute
of the query. This component is rendered as a
rectangular box in web page space where user can
give some input information
RenderedGroup: it represents one concept of the
query, it conatins a list of attributes. Each attribute
may be recursively another RenderedGroup or a
field. It is rendered in web page as recursive
imbrications of rectangular boxes.

-

RenderdCollection: it is the root of the query, it
meets all concepts of the query. It is rendered in
web page as the most external rectangular box.

-

NotRenderedGroup: Some elements in web page
such as pictures and hyperlinks are not in the query.
There is no mapping between these elements and
attributes of the query.

-

VisualBox: one internal element of the query may
contains concepts of different natures (field, group
of fields, super-group). Hence, in order to be
grouped together, all elements of the model extend
one abstract visual element: the VisualBox.

Example: Query in figure 2 is instance of our query model.
There is ten fields, four RenderedGroup (2, 3, Departing On,
Returning On), and one RenderedCollection (root).

IV.

A NEW APPROACH OF QUERY EXTRACTION

The basic idea of VIQI (Visual Interpretation of Query
Interfaces) is based on User’s Interpretation. We call User’s
Interpretation the visual human capacity to distinguish
group of fields in web page space. Interpretation is closely
related to proximity and alignment between fields. For
example, the group of fields {‘‘Leaving From’’, ‘’Going
To’’} forms one concept of the query and are close to each
other and left aligned (see figure 3).
We measure closeness between fields by Euclidean
Distance between them. The Euclidean Distance between
two fields is the minimal distance between any pair of
points which belong respectively to each one of the fields
(see Equation 1).

DistEucl( f 1, f 2) = minp1∈ f 1, p2∈ f 2 DistEucl( p1, p2) (1)
with p1 a point of f1 and p2 a point of f2
We calculate alignment between fields based on Align
function. We distinguish four classes of alignments:
Buttom, Top, Left, and Right. The function AlignX returns 1
when two fields are aligned, else it returns 0.
1 if f 1 et f 2 are aligned X
(3)
AlignX ( f 1, f 2) = 
0 else
X takes the values ‘B’ (Buttom), ‘T’ (Top), ‘L’ (Left), or ‘R’
(Right).
Align( f 1, f 2) = 2. AlignB ( f 1, f 2) + AlignT ( f 1, f 2) +
(2)
AlignL ( f 1, f 2) + AlignR ( f 1, f 2)
Over the alignment of fields is high, fields are more likely to
belong to the same concept. Buttom alignment is the most
descriptive to grouping of fields because reading order of
fields is per line (buttom alignment). Equation 4 gives the
measure Proximity. This measure depends on two factors:
Euclidian distance and Alignment. Over closeness of fields

RenderedCollection

Leaving From

VisualBox

Going To
RenderedCollection

RenderedGroups
Adult

Child

depD

depM

retD

retM

NotRenderdGroup

Infant

RenderedGroup

field
field

Flight Class
(a) Visual Boxes of Query

(b) Query Model

Figure4. Matching visual query elements to query’s semantic concepts

is high, the Euclidean distance between them is small, then
the proximity between fields is also small. Hence fields
have high probability to be grouped together. In other hand,
over alignment of fields is high, Align (f1, f2) is High, then
the proximity between fields is small. Hence probability to
be grouped together is high.
DistEucl ( f 1, f 2)
(4)
Proximity ( f 1, f 2) =
Align ( f 1, f 2)
In order to calculate groups of fields, we have used a
clustering algorithm based on density DBSCAN (DensityBased Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise) [19].
The definition of cluster in DBSCAN is based on the
concept of scope of density: a field f1 is in the scope of
density of field f2 if the proximity between f1 and f2 is
inferior to ε. We have fixed ε to the minimal proximity value
between any two fields not clustered, and Noise is orphan
fields, i.e it has no other fields in its scope of density (e.g
field ‘FlightClass’). DBSCAN algorithm is shown in
Algorithm 1. In order to detect clusters, DBSCAN proceeds
as follows:
- step1. Choose one field not clustered (Line 4)
- step2. Get its immediate neighbors (Line 5)
- step3. If field has no neighbors then mark it as Noise
(Line 7), else expand the cluster recursively to the
agglomeration of fields (Line 13)
- step4. Repeat step1,step 2,and step3 until all fields are
clustered
Figure 4 is a running example of the algorithm on query
interface of figure 2. Squares correspond to fields and circles
show the scope of density of each field. One field is in the
scope of density of a second field if its corresponding circle
reaches the center of the second field’s square.

0)DBSCAN(D, eps, MinPts)
1)Output: Cluster C
2)BEGIN
3)Cluster Cloc = Φ
4) for each unvisited field f in query
5)
N = scopeDensity(f, eps)
6)
if sizeof(N) < MinPts
7)
mark f as NOISE
8)
else
9)
Cretae cluster Cloc
10)
add f to Cloc
11)
mark f as visited
12)
for each unvisited field f’ in N
13)
expandCluster(f’, N, Cloc, eps, MinPts)
14)
ENDFOR
14)
add Cloc to C
15)
ENDELSE
16) ENDFOR
17)END

I) ExpandCluster(f’, N, Cloc, eps, MinPts)
II) BEGIN
III)
N' = scopeDensity (f’, eps)
IV)
if sizeof(N') < MinPts
V)
mark f’ as NOISE
VI)
else
VII)
mark f’ as visited
VIII)
add f’ to Cloc
IX)
for each unvisited field f’’ in N’
X)
ExpandCluster(f’’, N’, eps, Cloc)
XI)
ENDFOR
XII)
ENDELSE
XIII) END
Algorithm 1. Algorithme DBSCAN

For example, ‘Adults’ scope of density reaches ‘Children’
field, and ‘Children’ scope of density reaches ‘Adults’ and
‘Infants’. One iteration of DBSCAN creates the group of
fields ‘NumberPassengers’ as follows:

Table 1. Experimental results
TEL-8
Airfare

Auto.

Books

Airfare

Auto.

Books

#interfaces

20

19

19

20

20

19

#fields

10.75

7.78

10.70

5.10

#correct
query

13

14

17

13

13

16

#mistakes

7

5

2

7

7

3

Precision

Legend
: field f
: Proximity(f 1, f 2)
Figure 4. Running Example of DBSCAN

-

In step1, field ‘Adults’ is chosen.

-

In step2, scope of density of ‘Adults’ reaches ‘Children’
(see ‘Adults’ green circle), so the cluster is {‘Adults’,
‘Children’}

-

In step3, the cluster is expanded to {‘Children’,
‘Infants’} because scope of density of ‘Children’
reaches ‘Infants’ (see ‘Children’ green circle), so the
cluster {‘Adults’, ‘Children’} is expanded to {‘Adults’,
‘Children’, ‘Infants’}.

-

In step4, choose next not clustered field

ICQ

0,65

0,73

5.35

0,89

0,65

0,65

5.30

0,84

We remark that the precision of VIQI depends on the
average number of fields in each collection of interfaces.
Over number of fields in query interface is high, the more
the precision of our algorithm is low. It depends also on the
complexity of query: the more the imbrications of concepts
are high, the more the precision of VIQI is low. Hence
queries of airfaire subject are the more complex. Queries in
Auto collection are less complex than airfare collection and
more complex than Books’ queries. The latter are the most
simple because many queries are flat, i.e. all fields are
clustered in one cluster. For Books collection VIQI have the
highest precision (~ 90% on TEL-8).

We remark that circles having the same color form one
group of fields which correspond to one concept of the
query.
We have shown in the running example how to calculate
group of fields. Super-groups are recursively obtained by
running recursively DBSCAN on groups. Stop condition is
reached when all fields are clustered into one super-cluster
‘root’.
V.

Figure 2. Precision of VIQI on TEL-8

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

We have tested performance of VIQI on two standard
datasets ICQ and TEL-8 [20]. ICQ and TEL-8 are two
collection of query interfaces collected from deep Web
services. For each query interface, its manually extracted
query is available on the dataset. Interfaces are classified
into five classes of subjects: Airfare, automobile, Books,
Real estate, and Jobs.
Our evaluation methodology is as follows: we extract
query from query interface using VIQI, then we compare it
to query extracted manually. If the two queries are the same,
we say that VIQI have extracted the query correctly, else we
say that VIQI have committed a mistake. Table 1 resumes
our experimental results.

Figure 3. Precision of VIQI on ICQ

VI.

CONCLUSION

In this paper we have presented two main contributions.
The first one is a new technique to represent concepts of
query and semantic relation between them. The second

contribution is a new approach of query extraction based on
visual interpretation of interfaces, it extracts query from
existing query interface. We have measured performance of
our approach on two standard datasets ICQ and TEL-8 and
we have proved that our approach achieves good precision.
Our future work is to propose an approach which
integrates query interface of the same subject in one generic
query interface. This approach is starting point to a new web
service which facilitates Information Retrieval from Deep
Web.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Wu, C. Yu, A. Doan, W. Meng, ‘’An interactive clustering-based
approach to integrating source query interfaces on the deep Web’’, In
Proceedings of SIGMOD '04, 2004.
[2] W. Wu, A. Doan, C. Yu, ‘’Merging Interface Schemas on the Deep
Web via Clustering Aggregation’’, In Proceedings of ICDM '05, .
2005.
[3] F. Jiang, L. Jia, W. Meng, X. Meng, ‘’MrCoM: A Cost Model for
Range Query Translation in Deep Web Data Integration’’, In
Proceedings of SKG '08, 2008.
[4] Z. Zhang, B. He, and K. C-C Chang, ‘’Light-weight domain-based form
assistant: querying web databases on the fly’’, In Proceedings of
VLDB '05, 2005.
[5] Z. Zhang, B. He, and K. C.-C. Chang , ‘’On-the-fly Constraint Mapping
across Web Query Interfaces’’. In Proceedings of VLDB-IIWeb'04,
2004.
[6] J. Jansen and Dick C.A. Bulterman, ‘’Enabling adaptive time-based
web applications with SMIL state’’, In Proceedings of DocEng '08,
2008.
[7] M. Jayapandian, H. V. Jagadish. 2008, ‘’Expressive query specification
through form customization’’, In Proceedings of EDBT '08, 2008.
[8] J. Madhavan, D. Ko, L. Kot, V. Ganapathy, A. Rasmussen, A.Y.
Halevy, ‘’Google’s Deep Web crawl’’, In Proceedings of VLDB,
2008.
[9] www.google.com
[10] E-C. Dragut, T. Kabisch, C. Yu, U. Leser, ‘’A hierarchical approach to
model web query interfaces for web source integration’’, In
Proceeding of. VLDB 2009, 2009.
[11] W. Wensheng, A-H Doan, C. Yu, W. Meng , ‘’Modeling and
Extracting Deep-Web Query Interfaces’’, In Proceedings of AIIS
2009, 2009.
[12] Z. Zhang, B. He, and K. Chang, ‘’Understanding Web query
interfaces: Best-effort parsing with hidden syntax’’, In Proceedings of
SIGMOD’04, 2004.
[13] M. Dörk, S. Carpendale, C. Collins, C. Williamson, ‘’VisGets:
Coordinated Visualizations for Web-based Information Exploration
and Discovery’’, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics (Proceedings Information Visualization 2008), 2008.
[14] D. Cai, S. Yu, J-R. Wen, W-Y. Ma, ‘’Extracting content structure for
web pages based on visual representation’’, In Proceedings of the
APWeb'03, 2003.
[15] H. Nguyen, T. Nguyen, J. Freire, ‘’Learning to extract form labels’’,
In Proceedings of. VLDB 2008, 2008.
[16] R. Boughammoura, M-N. Omri, and H. Youssef., ‘’Fuzzy Approach
for Pertinent Information Extraction from Web Resources’’, Journal
of Computing and e-Systems, Vol. 1 No. 1, 2008.
[17] R. Boughammoura, M-N. Omri, ‘’Statistical Approach for Information
Extraction from Web Pages’’, In proceedings of International
Symposium on Distance Education (EAD’2009), 2009.
[18] R. Boughammoura, M-N. Omri, ‘’SeMQI: A New Model for Semantic
Interpretation of Query Interfaces’’, In Proceedings of NGNS’11,
2011.

[19] M. Ester, H-P Kriegel, J. Sander, X. Xu, ‘’A density-based algorithm
for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise’’, In
proceeding of KDD-96, 1996.
[20] The UIUC Web Integration Repository, Computer Science
Department, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
http://metaquerier.cs.uiuc.edu/repository, 2003.

