Possibilistic Pertinence Feedback and Semantic
Networks for Goal’s Extraction
Mohamed Nazih Omri
Department of Technology
Preparatory Institute of Engineering Studies of Monastir
Kairouan Road, 5019 Monastir, Tunisia
E-mail:nazih.omri@ipeim.rnu.tn

Abstract
Pertinence Feedback is a technique that enables a user to interactively express his information requirement by
modifying his original query formulation with further information. This information is provided by explicitly
confirming the pertinent of some indicating objects and/or goals extracted by the system. Obviously the user cannot
mark objects and/or goals as pertinent until some are extracted, so the first search has to be initiated by a query and
the initial query specification has to be good enough to pick out some pertinent objects and/or goals from the
Semantic Network. In this paper we present a short survey of fuzzy and Semantic approaches to Knowledge
Extraction. The goal of such approaches is to define flexible Knowledge Extraction Systems able to deal with the
inherent vagueness and uncertainty of the Extraction process. It has long been recognised that interactivity improves
the effectiveness of Knowledge Extraction systems. Novice user’s queries are the most natural and interactive
medium of communication and recent progress in recognition is making it possible to build systems that interact with
the user. However, given the typical novice user’s queries submitted to Knowledge Extraction Systems, it is easy to
imagine that the effects of goal recognition errors in novice user’s queries must be severely destructive on the
system’s effectiveness. The experimental work reported in this paper shows that the use of possibility theory in
classical Knowledge Extraction techniques for novice user’s query processing is more robust than the use of the
probability theory. Moreover, both possibilistic and probabilistic pertinence feedback can be effectively employed to
improve the effectiveness of novice user’s query processing.
Key words: Knowledge Extraction, Fuzzy Goal, Fuzzy Object, Semantic Network, Possibilistic Pertinence Feedback, Probabilistic Relevance
Feedback.

1.

Introduction

The effectiveness of a KES is therefore crucially related to the system's capability to deal with the vagueness
and uncertainty of the Extraction process. Commercially available KESs generally ignore these aspects; they
oversimplify both the representation of the Objects' content and the user-system interaction. The goal of a Knowledge
Extraction System (KES) is to extract knowledge considered pertinent to a user's request, expressed in the natural
language. The pertinence feedback of a KES is measured through parameters, which reflect the ability of the system
to accomplish such goal. However, the nature of the goal is not deterministic, since uncertainty and vagueness are
present in many different parts of the extraction process. The user's expression of his/her knowledge needs in a
request is uncertain and often vague, the representation of an Object and/or a Goal informative content is uncertain,
and so is the process by which a request representation is matched to an Object representation.
The research in KE has aimed at modeling the vagueness and uncertainty, which invariably characterize the
management of knowledge. A first glens of approaches is based on methods of analysis of natural language [1]. The
main limitation of these methods is the level of deepness of the analysis of the language, and their consequent range
of applicability: a satisfying interpretation of the Objects' meaning needs a too large number of decision rules even in
narrow application domains. A second glens of approaches is more general: their objective is to define Extraction
models, which deal with imprecision, and uncertainty independently on the application domain. The set of approaches
belonging to this class goes under the name of Probabilistic Information Retrieval (IR) [2]. There is another set of
approaches receiving increasing interest that aims at applying techniques for dealing with vagueness and uncertainty.
This set of approaches goes under the name of Knowledge Extraction (KE).
The results of an experimental study of the effects of the use of possibilistic and probabilistic technics in
novice user’s queries on the effectiveness of a KE system are presented in this paper. The paper is structured as
follows. Section 2 describes the structure of fuzzy Goals and fuzzy Objects used in the Semantic Network. Section 3
presents an introduction to the KES problem. This section also gives the motivations of the work reported here.

Section 4 reports on the use of probabilistic relevance feedback as a first way to improve the effectiveness of the
User’s Query Processing task. Section 5 reports on the use of possibilistic pertinent feedback as a second way to
improve the effectiveness of the User’s Query Processing task. Section 6 presents the experimental environment of
the study: the test collection, the queries, and the KE system used. The limitations of the study are reported in 7. In
section 8 we draw the conclusions of our study.

2.

Fuzzy Goals and Fuzzy Objects

In possibility theory, there has been a lot of research into the notion of Knowledge Extraction. However,
researchers have mainly analysed the information retreival from document, while we need a somewhat more
sophisticated notion: Goal Extraction from fuzzy sets to fuzzy goals in a Semantic Network. To extend definitions of
Knowledge (goal) Extraction from fuzzy sets to fuzzy goals, we must first analyse how fuzzy objects and goals can be
described in terms of fuzzy sets [3, 4].
How does a user formulate his or her gaols? For example, how do we describe a goal when we look for a house
to buy? A natural goal is to have a car not too old, not too expensive, a red color, etc. In general, to describe a goals:
• we list attributes (in the above example, age, cost, and color), and
• we list the desired (fuzzy) value A1,…,An of these attributes (in the above example, these values are,
correspondingly, “not too old”, “not too expensive”, and “red”).
Each of the fuzzy values like “not too old” can be represented, in a natural way, as a fuzzy set.
Similarly, an object can be described if we list the attributes and corresponding values. At first glance, it may
seem that from this viewpoint, a description of an object is very much alike the description of a goal, but there is a
difference.

3.

Knowledge Extraction System

In this paper we will survey the application to KE of three theories that have been used in Artificial
Intelligence for quite some time: possibility, probability ans SN theories. The use of these techniques in KE has been
recently refered to as Knowledge Extraction in analogy with the areas called Computing and Information Retreival[5,
6].
Fuzzy set theory [7] is a formal framework well suited to model vagueness: in information retreival it has been
successfully employed at several levels [8, 9], in particular for the definition of a superstructure of the Boolean
model[10], with the appealing consequence that Boolean KESs can be improved without redesigning them
completely [11, 12, 13]. Through these extensions the gradual nature of pertinence of Objects to user’s requests can
be modelled.
A Knowledge Extraction system is a computing tool, which represents and stores knowledge to be
automatically extracted for future use. Most actual KE systems store and enable the Extraction of only knowledge or
Objects. However, this is not an easy task, it must be noticed that often the sets of Objects a KES has to deal with
contain several thousands or sometimes millions of Objects and/or Goals.
A user accesses the KES by submitting a request; the KES then tries to extract all Objects and/or Goals that are
"pertinent" to the request. To this purpose, in a preliminary phase, the Objects contained in the Semantic Network
(SN) [14, 15, 16] are analyzed to provide a formal representation of their contents: this process is known as
"indexing"[4]. Once an Object has been analyzed a surrogate describing the Object is stored in an index, while the
Object itself is also stored in the SN. To express some knowledge needs a user formulates a request, in the system's
request language. The request is matched against entries in the index in order to determine which Objectsand/or goals
are pertinent to the user. In response to a request, a KES can provide either an exact answer or a ranking of Objects
that appear likely to contain knowledge pertinent to the request. The result depends on the formal model adopted by
the system. In our KES, requests are expressed in natural language.
A different approach is based on the application of the SN theory to KE. Semantic Networks have been used
in this context to design and implement KESs that are able to adapt to the characteristics of the KE environment, and
in particular to the user's interpretation of pertinent. In this chapter we will review the applications of fuzzy set theory
and Semantic networks to KE.

4.

Probabilistic Relevance Feedback

Probabilistic relevance feedback (PRF) is a technique that consists of adding new goals to the original query.
The goals added are chosen by taking the first m goals in a list where all the goals present in pertinent objects are
ranked according to the following weighting function [17]:

w i = log

ri (N − n i − R + ri )
(R − ri )(. n i − ri )

(1)

where: N is the number of objects in the collection, ni is the number of objects with an occurrence of goal i, R is the
number of pertinent objects pointed out by the user, and ri is the number of pertinent objects pointed out by the user
with an occurrence of goal i. Essentially, PRF compares the frequency of occurrence of a goal in the objects marked
as pertinent with its frequency of occurrence in the whole object collection. If a goal occurs more frequently in the
objects marked as pertinent as in the whole object collection it is assigned a higher weight. There are two ways of
choosing the goals to add to the query:




adding goals whose weight is over a predefined threshold,
or adding a fix number of goals, the k goals with the highest weight.

In the experiments reported in this paper we used the second technique. After a few tests, the number of terms
added to the original query was set to 10. This number has been proved experimentally to be quite effective, without
modifying the extending the scope of the query too much [17].

5.

Possibilistic Pertinence Feedback

Let, E1, E2... Ep a subsets no emptiness, two to two distinct, of Ω (supposed finished), where carry weights of
probability, noted m(E1)... m(Ep), as, according to Shafer[18]:

∑ m (E )= 1 ,

(2)

i

i =1, p

and

∀ i , m (E

i

)

f0

(3)

In this situation, the probability of an event TO will be imprecise that to be-to-say restrained in an interval
[P*(A),P*(A)], defined by :

P* ( A )=

∑ m(E )= ∑ m (E ).N ( A )
i

i

Ei ⊆ A

P*( A)=

Ei

(4)

i

∑m(E )=∑m(E ).∏ ( A)
i

Ei ⊆ A ≠ ∅

i

Ei

(5)

i

We verify that the function P* is a measure of possibility if and only if E1 ⊂ E2 ⊂ … ⊂ Ep then the possibility
distribution π associated to P* and P* is defined by Dubois-Prade[19]:
p

∀ w ,π (w )= P * ({w })= ∑ m (E
j=i

=0

if

j

) if

w∈ Ω − E

w∈ E i, w∉ E i − 1
p

(6)

We then define the possibilistic inverse object frequency (πiof) formula given by:
p

π iof (gi ) = P*({gi })=−∑log ni
j =1

N

(7)

where ni is the number of objects in which the goal gi occurs, and N is the total number of objects in the SN.
The possibilistic goal frequency (πgf) is defined as:

π gf ( g i , o j )=

log ( f i , j + 1 )
log (L j )

(8)

where fi,j is the possibilistic frequency of goal gi in object oj , and Lj is the number of unique goals in object oj.
We then define a possibilistic score πS of each object by summing the πgf and πiof possibilistic weights of all
query goals found in the object:

π (o j ,q )= ∑π iof (g i ).π gf (i, j )
S

g i ∈q

(9)

In the KE literature there exist many variations of this formula dependeng on the way of πgf and πiof weights are
computed[11, 13]. We chose this one because it is the most standard schema.
A technique that enables a user to interactively express his goal requirement by modifying his original query
formulation with further information is the standard Relevance Feedbak[14, 20, 21]. This additional information is
provided by explicitely confirming the pertinent of some indicating object extracted by the system. Obviously the
user cannot mark objects as pertinent until some are extracted, so the first search has to be initiated by a query and the
initial query specification has to be good enough to pick out some pertinent objects from the SN. The user can mark
the object(s) as pertinent and starts the PF process.
Among the many algorithms for PF, Probabilistic Relevance Feedback was chosen and implemented. Briefly,
Probabilistic PF consists of adding new goals to the original query. The goals added are chosen by taking the first k
goals in a list where all the goals present in pertinent objects are ranked according to the following pertinent
weighting function [13]:

pw (g i )= ri.log

(ri + 0 . 5 )(. N − n i − R + ri + 0 . 5 )
(R − ri + 0 . 5 )(. n i − ri + 0 . 5 )

(10)

where: N is the number of objects in the semantic network, ni is the number of objects with at least one occurrence of
goal gi, R is the number of pertinent objects used in the PF, and ri is the number of pertinent objects in R with at least
one occurrence of goal gi. The possibilistic score πS for each object is then calculated using the following formula that
uses the pertinent weight pw(gi) of the goal gi instead of πiof(gi).

πS

RF

(o j,q )= ∑π pw(gi ).π pgf (i, j )

(11)

g i ∈q

Possibilistic Pertinence Feedback compares the possibility of occurrence of a goal in the objects marked as
pertinent with its possibility of occurrence in the whole object in the SN. If a goal occurs more possible in the objects
marked as pertinent than in the whole object in the SN it is assigned a higher pw(gi) weight. Then, there are two ways
of choosing the goals to add to the query:



adding goals whose weight is over a predefined threshold,
or adding a fix number of goals, for example the k goals with the highest pw(gi) weight.

In the experiments reported in this paper we used the second technique. After a few tests, the number of goals to be
added to the original query was set to 10.

6.

Experimental Analysis

We decided to compare the two techniques (PPF and PRF) to see if one was better than the other from an
experimental KE point of view. The motivation behind this analysis lies in the results of a previous investigation into
a comparison of the results of the two previously described techniques [3]. In that study we discovered, given the best
possible parameters settings, PPF performed as well as PRF, but extracted different sets of objects. The
experimentation reported in this paper is more accurate, uses larger data sets, and aims at testing the possibility of
combining the two techniques. We chosed to perform our analysis following the classical KE experimental
methodology, using KE effectiveness measures and KE test collections. The main measures used in KE are PertinentExtracted and precision.
Object-Pertinent-Extracted (ope) is the sub-set of all objects in the collections that are pertinent to a query and
that are actually extracted:

ope=

pertinent and extracted objects
pertinent objects

(12)

Precision (PR) is the sub-set of the extracted objects that are also pertinent to the query:

pr=

pertinent and extracted objects
extracted objects

(13)

In the following sections we present the results using pertinent-extracted and precision graphs (PR/PE graphs).
These graphs are obtained by depicting the precision figures at standard levels of pertinent-extracted.

6.1

Experimental and Evaluation Settings

The object collections chosen for the investigation are the Word processor, and the telephone’s application test
collections. The main characteristics of these two test collections are summarised in Table 1. These are classical KE
test collections used by our researchers in the field and described in [3, 4].
At the current stage, our research was not concerned with efficiency issues, and we decided that size was not so
important. There are still many open issues in the application of SN to KE, and the problem of scaling the results is
one of the major ones. We are aware of the fact that the collections used in our experiments can be considered small
from the KE point of view.

6.2

Comparing Probabilistic Relevance and Possibilistic Pertinence Feedback

Since our first comparative look at PRF and PPF we noticed that the set of goals added to the initial query was
very different. In other words, taking the same initial query and feeding back the same objects to the PPF and PRF we
obtained different sets of goals (and different weights for the same goals) to be added to the query. In a test over 25
queries randomly chosen from the set of queries of our Word processor experimental collection we found that the
difference between the two sets of m (m = 10) goals to be added to the query was on average 28%, i.e., at least 3
goals where different. The difference in weights between the same goals present in both sets was on average 87%.
Analogous differences were found using the other test collections.
We compared the performance of PRF and PPF using training sets of different sizes. Figures 1 and 2 show
graphically how the performance of PPF and PRF increases when the device is given an increasing number of
pertinent objects.
The results reported in the tables refers to the Word processor collection, similar results were obtained using
the Telephone’s application collection. This shows what we expected: both PPF and PRF act like pattern recognition
devices and the more information they receive the more they can discriminate between patterns of pertinent and not
pertinent objects. The performance has been evaluated averaging over all queries in the pertinence assessment at
different values of the number of pertinent objects given as feedback. The graphs show that the PPF increases more
rapidly in performance than the PRF. This is due to the better characteristics of non linear discrimination of PPF, that
enables it to separate better the two sets of pertinent and non-pertinent objects.

From the KE point of view, however, the performance of PRF are better than those of PPF. PRF is more
effective at lower levels of training. This makes PRF more useful in applications where the percentage of pertinent
objects versus the total number of object used in the pertinence feedback is usually low.

7.

Limitations

In this paper we present a study of the effectiveness of possibilistic and probabilistic pertinence feedback on
novice user’s queries processing. We have reported some results in the previous sections of an analysis of the effects
of the use of possibility and probability theories in user’s queries on the effectiveness of an KE system. We believe
the work presented here to be complete since it uses a larger number of query sets, a larger collection of objects, and
a more classical KE system that was not tuned to the test collection used.
Nevertheless, there are at least two important limitations to this study:

8.

1.

The collection of the queries used in the experimentation were not really representative of typical novice
user’s queries. However, it has been long recognised that novice user’s query is mainly dependent upon the
application domain and the KE environment.

2.

Dictated user’s query is considerably different from spontaneous one. We should expect spontaneous novice
user’s queries to have higher levels of precision and pertinent-extracted. Unfortunately, there is no set of
spontaneous novice user’s queries available for query processing experimentation and its construction is not
an easy task.

Conclusions and futur works

In this paper the briefly summarised of the results of this investigation, demonstrate that a Pertinence Feedback
device based on PPF is more effective that PRF for low level of training. A low level of training (i.e., a small number
of objects indicated as pertinent by the user) is typical of real life KE applications. However, since at any level of
training PPF and PRF identify different sets of goals to be added to those present in the original query, a combination
of PPF and PRF could prove effective. The results in this direction reported in this paper seem to indicate that the
combination is indeed effective. Nevertheless, more tests with larger collections of objects and with different
algorithms for PPF and PRF are necessary to validate these results and fully exploit their usefulness.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]

Smeaton, A.F. Progress in the application of Natural Language Processing to Information Retrieval tasks. The
Computer Journal, 35(3):268-278, 1992.
Crestani, F., Lalmas, M., Campbell, I. and van Risbergen, C.J. Is this document relevant? ...probably. A survey
of probabilistic models in information retrieval. AGM Computting Survey. In print.
Omri, M.N., Tijus, C.A., Poitrenaud, S. & Bouchon-Meunier, B. Fuzzy Sets and Semantic Networks for OnLine Assistance. Proceedings of the Eleven IEEE Conference on Artificial Intelligence Applications. LosAngeles, (1995).
Omri, M.N., Fuzzy Interactive System to Use Technical Divices: SIFADE. Ph. D. Dissertation, University
Paris VI, Paris, (1994).
Salton, G. and McGill, M.J. Introduction to modern information retrieval New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 1983.
Van Rijsbergen, C.J. information Retrieval. Butterworths, London, second edition, 1979.
Zadeh, L. A. Fuzzy sets. Information and control, 8, 338-353, 1965.
Kraft, D. H. and Bueli, D. A. Fuzzy sets and generalized Boolean retrieval systems. International Journal of
Man-Machine Studies, 19(1), July, 45-56,1983.
Wailer, W. G. and Kraft, D. H. A mathematical model of a weighted Boolean retrieval system. Information
Processing and Management, 15, 235-245, 1979.
Kraft, D. H., Bordogna, G. and Pasi, G. An extended fnzzy linguistic approach to generalize Boolean
information retrieval, Journal of Information Science Applications, 2(3), 1995.
Bueil, D. A. and Kraft, D. H. A model for a weighted retrieval system. Journal of the American Societyfor
Information Science, 32(3), May, 211-216, 1981.
Lucarella, D. and Morara, R. fIRST: fuzzy information retrieval system. Journal of Information Science, 17(2),
81-91, 1991.

[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]

Bueil, D. A. ard Kraft, D. H. Performance measurement in a fuzzy retrieval environment. In Proceedings of the
Fourth International Conference on Information Storage and Retrieval, 31 May-2 June, 1981, Oal:Iand, CA;
SIGIR Forum, 16(1), Summer, 5662, 1981.
Omri, M.N. & Chouigui N. Linguistic Variables Definition by Membership Function and Measure of
Similarity. 14 th International Conference on Systems Science.Wroclaw, Poland, (2001).
Omri, M.N. & Chouigui N. Measure of Similarity Between Fuzzy Concepts for Identification of Fuzzy User’s
Requests in Fuzzy Semantic Networks. International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based
Systems.Vol. 9, No. 6, 743-748, (2001).
Omri, M.N. Relevance Feedback for Goal’s Extraction from Fuzzy Semantic Networks . Asian Journal of
Information Technology. Vol. 2, No. 5, (2004).
Yager, R. R. A note on weighted queries in information retrieval systems. Journal of tie American Society for
Information Science, 38(1) 1987.
Yager, R. R. On ordered weighted averaging aggregation operators in multi criteria decision making. IEEB
Transactions on Sytems, Man and Cyberneties, 18(1), 18~ 190,1988.
Shafer, G. A Mathematical theory of evidence. Princeten University Press, Princeton N. J., 1976.
Dubois D. & Prade H. theories of possibilities. application to the representation of knowledge in data
processing. Masson, Paris Milan Barcelone Mexico, 1988.
Miyamoto, S. fuzzy sets in Infarmation Retrieval and Cluster Analysis. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1990.

Data
Objects
queries
goals in objects
goals in query
average object length
average query length

Word processor
Telephone’s application
140
132
25
52
50
31
3
2
6
5
15
11
Table 1. Test collections data

Precision

Experiments with Probabilistic Relevance Feedback on the
Word Collection
1 pertinent object
2 pertinent objects
3 pertinent objects
5 pertinent objects
10 pertinent objects

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Pertinent-Extracted

Fig. 1. Performance of Probabilistic Relevance Feedback.

Precision

Experiments with possibilistic pertinence Feedback on the
Word Collection
1 pertinent object
2 pertinent objects
3 pertinent objects
5 pertinent objects
10 pertinent objects

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Pertinent-Extracted
Fig. 2. Performance of Possibilistic Pertinence Feedback.

