Continuous Time Dynamic Topic Models

Chong Wang
Computer Science Dept.
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540

1

David Blei
Computer Science Dept.
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540

David Heckerman
Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052

Abstract

email [15], computer vision [7], bioinformatics [18], and
information retrieval [24]. For a good review, see [8].

In this paper, we develop the continuous time
dynamic topic model (cDTM). The cDTM is
a dynamic topic model that uses Brownian
motion to model the latent topics through
a sequential collection of documents, where
a “topic” is a pattern of word use that we
expect to evolve over the course of the collection. We derive an efficient variational
approximate inference algorithm that takes
advantage of the sparsity of observations in
text, a property that lets us easily handle many time points. In contrast to the
cDTM, the original discrete-time dynamic
topic model (dDTM) requires that time be
discretized. Moreover, the complexity of variational inference for the dDTM grows quickly
as time granularity increases, a drawback
which limits fine-grained discretization. We
demonstrate the cDTM on two news corpora,
reporting both predictive perplexity and the
novel task of time stamp prediction.

Most topic models assume the documents are exchangeable in the collection, i.e., that their probability
is invariant to permutation. Many document collections, such as news or scientific journals, evolve over
time. In this paper, we develop the continuous time
dynamic topic model (cDTM), which is an extension of
the discrete dynamic topic model (dDTM) [2]. Given
a sequence of documents, we infer the latent topics and
how they change through the course of the collection.

Introduction

Tools for analyzing and managing large collections of
electronic documents are becoming increasingly important. In recent years, topic models, which are hierarchical Bayesian models of discrete data, have become a widely used approach for exploratory and predictive analysis of text. Topic models, such as latent
Dirichlet allocation (LDA) and the more general discrete component analysis [3, 4], posit that a small
number of distributions over words, called topics, can
be used to explain the observed collection. LDA is
a probabilistic extension of latent semantic indexing
(LSI) [5] and probabilistic latent semantic indexing
(pLSI) [11]. Owing to its formal generative semantics,
LDA has been extended and applied to authorship [19],

The dDTM uses a state space model on the natural parameters of the multinomial distributions that represent the topics. This requires that time be discretized
into several periods, and within each period LDA is
used to model its documents. In [2], the authors analyze the journal Science from 1880-2002, assuming
that articles are exchangeable within each year. While
the dDTM is a powerful model, the choice of discretization affects the memory requirements and computational complexity of posterior inference. This largely
determines the resolution at which to fit the model.
To resolve the problem of discretization, we consider
time to be continuous. The continuous time dynamic
topic model (cDTM) proposed here replaces the discrete state space model of the dDTM with its continuous generalization, Brownian motion [14]. The cDTM
generalizes the dDTM in that the only discretization
it models is the resolution at which the time stamps
of the documents are measured.
The cDTM model will, generally, introduce many more
latent variables than the dDTM. However, this seemingly more complicated model is simpler and more efficient to fit. As we will see below, from this formulation
the variational posterior inference procedure can take
advantage of the natural sparsity of text, the fact that
not all vocabulary words are used at each measured
time step. In fact, as the resolution gets finer, fewer
and fewer words are used.

This provides an inferential speed-up that makes it
possible to fit models at varying granularities. As examples, journal articles might be exchangeable within
an issue, an assumption which is more realistic than
one where they are exchangeable by year. Other data,
such as news, might experience periods of time without
any observation. While the dDTM requires representing all topics for the discrete ticks within these periods,
the cDTM can analyze such data without a sacrifice
of memory or speed. With the cDTM, the granularity
can be chosen to maximize model fitness rather than
to limit computational complexity.
We note that the cDTM and dDTM are not the only
topic models to take time into consideration. Topics
over time models (TOT) [23] and dynamic mixture
models (DMM) [25] also include timestamps in the
analysis of documents. The TOT model treats the
time stamps as observations of the latent topics, while
DMM assumes that the topic mixture proportions of
each document is dependent on previous topic mixture proportions. In both TOT and DMM, the topics
themselves are constant, and the time information is
used to better discover them. In the setting here, we
are interested in inferring evolving topics.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we describe the dDTM and develop the cDTM
in detail. Section 3 presents an efficient posterior inference algorithm for the cDTM based on sparse variational methods. In section 4, we present experimental
results on two news corpora.

2

Continuous time dynamic topic
models

In a time stamped document collection, we would like
to model its latent topics as changing through the
course of the collection. In news data, for example, a
single topic will change as the stories associated with
it develop. The discrete-time dynamic topic model
(dDTM) builds on the exchangeable topic model to
provide such machinery [2]. In the dDTM, documents
are divided into sequential groups, and the topics of
each slice evolve from the topics of the previous slice.
Documents in a group are assumed exchangeable.
More specifically, a topic is represented as a distribution over the fixed vocabulary of the collection. The
dDTM assumes that a discrete-time state space model
governs the evolution of the natural parameters of the
multinomial distributions that represent the topics.
(Recall that the natural parameters of the multinomial are the logs of the probabilities of each item.)
This is a time-series extension to the logistic normal
distribution [26].

Figure 1: Graphical model representation of the
cDTM. The evolution of the topic parameters βt is
governed by Brownian motion. The variable st is the
observed time stamp of document dt .
A drawback of the dDTM is that time is discretized.
If the resolution is chosen to be too coarse, then the
assumption that documents within a time step are exchangeable will not be true. If the resolution is too
fine, then the number of variational parameters will explode as more time points are added. Choosing the discretization should be a decision based on assumptions
about the data. However, the computational concerns
might prevent analysis at the appropriate time scale.
Thus, we develop the continuous time dynamic topic
model (cDTM) for modeling sequential time-series
data with arbitrary granularity. The cDTM can be
seen as a natural limit of the dDTM at its finest possible resolution, the resolution at which the document
time stamps are measured.
In the cDTM, we still represent topics in their natural
parameterization, but we use Brownian motion [14] to
model their evolution through time. Let i, j (j > i >
0) be two arbitrary time indexes, si and sj be the time
stamps, and ∆sj ,si be the elapsed time between them.
In a K-topic cDTM model, the distribution of the k th
(1 ≤ k ≤ K) topic’s parameter at term w is:
β0,k,w

∼

βj,k,w |βi,k,w , s ∼

N (m, v0 )

N βi,k,w , v∆sj ,si ,

(1)

where the variance increases linearly with the lag.
This construction is used as a component in the full
generative process. (Note: if j = i + 1, we write ∆sj ,si
as ∆sj for short.)
1. For each topic k, 1 ≤ k ≤ K,
(a) Draw β0,k ∼ N (m, v0 I).

2. For document dt at time st (t > 0):
(a) For each topic k, 1 ≤ k ≤ K,
i. From the Brownian motion model, draw
βt,k |βt−1,k , s ∼ N (βt−1,k , v∆st I).
(b) Draw θt ∼ Dir(α).
(c) For each word,
i. Draw zt,n ∼ Mult(θt ).
ii. Draw wt,n ∼ Mult(π(βt,zt,n )).
The function π maps the multinomial natural parameters, which are unconstrained, to its mean parameters,
which are on the simplex,
exp(βt,k,w )
.
π(βt,k )w = P
w exp(βt,k,w )

(2)

The cDTM is illustrated in Figure 1.
The cDTM can be seen as a generalization of the
dDTM. Both models assume that the log probability
of a term exhibits variance over an interval of time
between observations. In the dDTM, this interval is
evenly divided into discrete ticks. A parameter controls the variance at each tick, and the variance across
the whole interval is that parameter multiplied by the
number of ticks. As a consequence of this representation, the topic, i.e., the full distribution over terms,
is explicitly represented at each tick. For fine-grained
time series, this leads to high memory requirements
for posterior inference, even if the observations are
sparsely distributed throughout the timeline.
In the cDTM, however, the variance is a function of
the lag between observations, and the probabilities at
discrete steps between those observations need not be
considered. Inference, as we will see below, can be
handled sparsely. Thus, choosing the right granularity
becomes a modeling issue rather than one governed by
computational concerns. A dDTM is obtained with a
cDTM by measuring the time stamps of the documents
at the desired granularity.
Akin to Brownian motion as the limiting process of
a discrete-time Gaussian random walk [6], the cDTM
is the limiting process of the dDTM. Denote the pertick variance in the dDTM by σ 2 , and note that it
is a function of the tick granularity (to make models comparable). The cDTM is the limiting model in
this setting as σ 2 approaches zero. We emphasize that
with the cDTM, we need not represent the log probabilities at the ticks between observed documents. This
perspective is illustrated in Figure 2.

3

Sparse variational inference

The central problem in topic modeling is posterior inference, i.e., determining the distribution of the la-

Figure 2: Documents are available only at time s and
s0 , and no documents between them. When σ 2 → 0,
the dDTM becomes a cDTM, and we no longer need
to represent the steps between i and j.

tent topic structure conditioned on the observed documents. In sequential topic models, this structure
comprises the per-document topic proportions θd , perword topic assignments zd,n , and the K sequences
of topic distributions βt,k . The true posterior is not
tractable [2]. We must appeal to an approximation.
Several approximate inference methods have been developed for topic models. The most widely used are
variational inference [3, 20] and collapsed Gibbs sampling [9]. In the sequential setting collapsed Gibbs
sampling is not an option because the distribution of
words for each topic is not conjugate to the word probabilities. Thus, we employed variational methods.
The main idea behind variational methods is to posit
a simple family of distributions over the latent variables, indexed by free variational parameters, and
to find the member of that family which is closest
in Kullback-Leibler divergence to the true posterior.
Good overviews of this methodology can be found
in [12] and [22]. For continuous time processes, variational inference has been applied in Markov jump processes [1] and diffusion processes [17], where the variational distributions are also random processes.
For the cDTM described above, we adapt variational
Kalman filtering [2] to the continuous time setting.
For simplicity, assume that one document occurs at
each time point. In their algorithm, the variational
distribution over the latent variables is:
q(β1:T , z1:T,1:N , θ1:T | β̂, φ, γ) =
K
Y

q(β1,k , . . . , βT,k |β̂1,k , . . . , β̂T,k ) ×

k=1
T
Y
t=1

q(θt |γt )

Nt
Y

!
q(zt,n |φt,n ) .

(3)

n=1

The variational parameters are a Dirichlet γt for the
per-document topic proportions, multinomials φ for
each word’s topic assignment, and β̂ variables, which
are “observations” to a variational Kalman filter.
These variables are fit such that the approximate posterior is close to the true posterior. From the variational Kalman filter, the βk,t , 1 ≤ t ≤ T retain their
chained structure in the variational distribution. Vari-

ational inference proceeds by coordinate ascent, updating each of these parameters to minimize the KL
between the true posterior and variational posterior.
For simplicity, now we consider a model with only one
topic. These calculations are simpler versions of those
we need for the more general latent variable model
but exhibit the essential features of the algorithm.
For the cDTM, we assume a similar variational distribution, with the same variational Dirichlet and variational multinomials for the per-document variables.
The cDTM updates for these parameters are identical
to those in [2], and we do not replicate them here.
In principle, we can directly use the variational
Kalman filtering algorithm for the cDTM by replacing the state space model with Brownian motion. Let
V be the size of the vocabulary. While conceptually
straightforward, this will yield VT variational parameters in the vectors β̂1:T . When T and V are large, as
in a fine-graned model, posterior inference will require
massive amounts of time and memory. Thus, we develop a sparse variational inference procedure, which
significantly improves its complexity without sacrificing accuracy.
The main idea behind the sparse variational Kalman
filtering algorithm is that if certain βt,w do not describe any term emissions, i.e., there are no observations of w at t, then the true posterior of βt,w is only
determined by the observations of the other words at
that time. Therefore, we don’t need to explicitly represent β̂t,w for those w that are not observed.
Figure 3 illustrates the idea behind sparse variational
inference for the cDTM. In Figure 3, the variational
posterior of the log probability of a word βt,w is determined by the variational observations of the observed
words. From the belief propagation point of view, the
belief propagated from βt,w to node βt+2,w is not revised by term w, and this property is retained in the
sparse variational inference algorithm. The probability of variational observation β̂t,w given βt,w is a Gaussian:
β̂t,w |βt,w ∼ N (βt,w , v̂t ).

∼

mt,w

=

Vt,w

=

N (mt,w , Vt,w )

E(βt,w |β̂i,i≤t,w )
E((βt,w − mt,w )2 |β̂i,i≤t,w ).

If w is not observed at time step t then
mt,w

=

(5)

mt−1,w

Vt,w

=

Pt,w ,

Pt,w

=

Vt−1,w + v∆st ,

(6)

which means that the forward mean remains the same
as the previous step. Otherwise,
mt,w

=

Vt,w

=

β̂t,w |β̂i,i≤t−1,w

∼

(4)

We next describe the forward-backward algorithm for
the sparse variational Kalman filter, which is needed
to compute the expectations for updating the variational parameters. For a certain term w, the variational forward distribution p(βt,w |β̂i,i≤t,w ) is a Gaussian [13] and can be characterized as follows.
βt,w |β̂i,i≤t,w

Figure 3: A simplified graphical model shows how
sparse variational inference works with only single
topic. Note this generation process needs normalization to βt according to Equation 2, but this will not
affect the sparse solution. For term w, there are no observations at time index t + 1 (or time st+1 ), the corresponding variational observations don’t appear at time
index t + 1. For term w0 , there are no observations at
time index t+2 (or time st+2 ), the corresponding variational observations don’t appear at time index t + 2.

β̂t,w Pt,w + v̂t mt−1,w
Pt,w + v̂t
Pt,w
v̂t
Pt,w + v̂t
N (mt−1,w , Pt,w + v̂t ).

(7)

Similarly, the variational backward distribution
p(βt,w |β̂i,i≤T,w ) is also a Gaussian:
βt,w |β̂i,i≤T,w

∼

m
e t,w
Vet,w

=

m
e t−1,w

=

N (m
e t,w , Vet,w )

E(βt,w |β̂i,i≤T,w )
E((βt,w − me t,w )2 |β̂i,i≤T,w ).

= mt−1,w

ft v
Vt−1,w
+m
e t,w
Pt,w
Pt,w

Vet−1,w

=

Vt−1,w +

2
Vt−1,w
(Vet,w − Pt,w ).(8)
2
Pt,w

With this forward-backward computation in hand, we
turn to optimizing the variational observations β̂w,k
in the sparse setting. Equivalent to minimizing KL is
tightening the bound on the likelihood of the observations given by Jensen’s inequality [12].
L(β̂) ≥

T
X

Eq [(log p(wt |βt ) + log p(βt |βt−1 )] + H(q),

t=1

(9)
where H(q) is the entropy. This is simplified to
L(β̂) ≥

T
X

Eq

h

i
log p(wt |βt ) − log q(β̂t |βt )

t=1

+

T
X

log q(β̂t |β̂i,i≤t−1 ),

We use δt,w = 1 or 0 to represent whether β̂t,w is in
the variational observations or not. Then the terms
above are
X
Eq log q(wt |βt ) ≥
nt,w m
e t,w
w

−nt log

exp(m
e t,w + Vet,w /2)

w

=

X

δt,w Eq log q(β̂t,w |βt,w )

w

log q(β̂t |β̂i,i≤t−1 )

=

X

Sparsity
Day Week
0.68
0.12
0.95
0.79

Month
–
0.50

Table 1: Sparsity for two data sets where available.
Higher numbers indicate a sparser data set and more
efficiency for the cDTM over the dDTM.
evenly spaced over the time line. In the dDTM, these
documents were separated by years. To analyze them
at a finer scale, e.g., issue by issue, one needs to consider 6243 time points. With a vocabulary size of 5000,
for a 10-topic setting, the cDTM requires 0.8G memory while the dDTM requires 2.3G memory, nearly 3
times larger. The sparsity of Science is 0.65. This
means that a term only appears in about a third of
the total time points.

4

X

Hour
0.93
–

(10)

t=1

Eq log p(β̂t |βt )

Data set
AP
Election 08

δt,w log q(β̂t,w |β̂i,i≤t−1,w ).

w

The count of w in document dt is nt,w and nt =
P
w nt,w .
Thus, to optimize the variational observations, we
need only to compute the derivative ∂L/∂ β̂t,w for
thoseP
δt,w
P = 1. The general memory requirement
is O( t w δt,w )—the sum of the number of unique
terms at each time point—which is usually much
smaller than O(VT ), the memory requirement for the
densely represented algorithm. Formally, we can define the sparsity of the data set to be
P P
sparsity = 1 − ( t w δt,w ) /(VT ),
(11)
which we will compute for several data sets in the next
section. Finally, we note that we use the conjugate
gradient algorithm [16] to optimize the variational observations from these partial derivatives.
As an example of the speed-up offered by sparse variational inference, consider the Science corpus from
1880-2002, analyzed by [2], which contains 6243 issues of the magazine. Note that these issues are not

Experiments

In this section, we demonstrate the cDTM model on
two news corpora. We report predictive perplexity and
a results on the novel task of time stamp prediction.
4.1

News Corpora

We used two news corpora. First, “AP” is a subset
from the TREC AP corpus [10] containing the news
from 05/01/1988 to 06/30/1988. We extracted the
documents about the presidential election in 1988 resulting in 1, 342 documents. These documents are time
stamped by hour. Second, the “Election 08” data are
summaries of the top articles from Digg1 classified as
being part of the 2008 presidential election. We used
articles from 02-27-2007 to 02-22-2008. This data set
has 1, 040 summaries. Time is measured in days.
Table 1 shows the sparsity information for these data
in terms of the resolution at which we can analyze
them. This illustrates the gain in efficiency of the
cDTM. For example, in the day setting of the Election 08 data, the sparsity is 0.95. The dDTM model
will need at least 20 times more parameters than the
cDTM to analyze the data at this resolution.
4.2

Per-Word Predictive Perplexity

Let Dt be the set of documents at time index t. We
performed approximate posterior inference on these
data with the cDTM at different levels of granularity. To make models comparable, we set the variance
across the entire period to be the same (see Equation
1). We evaluated the models with perplexity. Specifi1

http://digg.com

cally, we computed the per-word predictive perplexity
of the documents at time t based on the data of the
previous t − 1 time indices,
)
(
1 X log p(wd |D1:t−1 )
.
perplexitypw (t) = exp −
|Dt |
Nd
d∈Dt

(12)
Note that lower numbers are better.
Since each document is predicted exactly once in all
models at different granularities, we also compute the
averaged per-word perplexity over the time line, which
is defined as
 P

log p(wd )
P
perplexitypw = exp − d∈D
.
(13)
d∈D Nd
In the AP data, we made predictions from 5/15/1988
to 05/29/1988. In the Election 08 data, we made predictions from 04/26/2007 to 02/22/2008. Figure 4
shows the results of the per-word predictive perplexity
over the time line on both data sets for the 10 topic
model. Figure 5 shows the results of average per-word
perplexity for 1, 3, 5 and 10 topics.
From the computational perspective, we note that the
sparse inference algorithm lets us fit models of different granularities efficiently. For the AP data, the day
model and week are almost comparable. Models with
5 and 10 topics perform better.
In the Election 08 data, the 1-topic model performs
best. We suspect that this is because the summaries
are very short. More complex models, i.e., those with
more topics, are not appropriate. The models perform
differently at different levels of granularity because the
amount of data supported at each time point depends
on the chosen level. It is not necessarily the case that
a finer grained model will contain enough data to provide a better predictive distribution.
4.3

Time Stamp Prediction

We can further use the cDTM for time stamp prediction, dating a document based on its content. To assess
this task, we split each data set into 80% training and
20% testing sets. We predict the time stamp of each
test document by finding its most likely location over
the time line. We measure the error in terms of the
same granularity at which the data are measured.
We investigated two approaches. The first is the flat
approach. Each model of different granularity predicts
as best it can. The second is the hierarchical approach.
We use models of increasing granularity to “zoom in”
on the prediction. For example, to predict the day, we
first find the best month, then the best week within
the month, and then the best day within the week.

We compute the average absolute error over the test
data set. Figure 6 illustrates the results.
The hierarchical approach always performs better than
or as well as the flat approach. The hour model in the
AP data and day model in Election 08 perform worse.
With the small data sets, a larger granularity is better.
The reason may also lie in the parameter v. Currently
it is shared among all models. In the future, we’d like
to infer it from the data.
4.4

Example Topics

We provide some example topics by using the week
model in the Election 08 data. We sample the topics
every two months. Figure 7 shows one of the topics. At
the beginning the election (year 2007), general issues
were discussed more, such as “healthcare.” As the
competition went up (year 2008), the topics were more
about candidates themselves and changing faster.

5

Conclusions

In this paper, we have developed the cDTM, using
Brownian motion to model continuous-time topic evolution. The main advantage of the cDTM is that we
can employ sparse variational inference for fast model
comparison. We demonstrated the use of cDTM by
measuring the predictive likelihood and time stamp
prediction accuracy on two real-world data sets. In future work, we plan to explore the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
(OU) model [21], a generalization of Brownian model,
that allows bounded variance.
Acknowledgments. We thank anonymous reviewers
for their valuable comments. We would also like to
thank Jordan Boyd-Graber and Jonathan Chang for
many insightful discussions. David M. Blei is supported by ONR 175-6343, NSF CAREER 0745520,
and grants from Google and Microsoft.

References
[1] C. Archambeau, M. Opper, Y. Shen, D. Cornford, and J. Shawe-Taylor. Variational inference
for diffusion processes. In NIPS, 2007.
[2] D. M. Blei and J. D. Lafferty. Dynamic topic
models. In ICML, 2006.
[3] D. M. Blei, A. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. Latent
Dirichlet allocation. JMLR, 3:993–1002, 2003.
[4] W. Buntine and A. Jakulin. Applying discrete
PCA in data analysis. In UAI, 2004.

small AP, 10 topics

election 08, 10 topics
2500

4000
3500

hour

day

day
week

week

2000

month

per−word perplexity

per−word perplexity

3000
2500
2000
1500

1500

1000

1000
500
500
0
05/15/1988

05/22/1988

0
04/26/2007

05/29/1988

9/22/2008

(a)

02/22/2008

(b)

Figure 4: Per-word predictive perplexity comparison. The straight lines are the corresponding averaged perword predictive perplexities. (a) AP data. The week model performs the best, but the day model is almost
comparable. (b) Election 08 data. The month model performs the best.
small AP

election 08
1600

4000

hour

day

1400

day

3500

week
averaged per−word perplexity

averaged per−word perplexity

week
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000

1000
800
600
400
200

500
0

month

1200

1 topic

3 topics

5 topics

10 topics

(a)

0

1 topic

3 topics

5 topics

10 topics

(b)

Figure 5: Averaged per-word predictive perplexity comparison. (a) AP data. The week model performs the best,
but the day model is almost comparable. (b) Election 08 data. The month model performs the best.
[5] S. Deerwester, S. Dumais, T. Landauer, G. Furnas, and R. Harshman. Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Journal of the American Society of
Information Science, 41(6):391–407, 1990.
[6] J. Durbin and S. Koopman. Time Series Analysis
by State Space Methods. Oxford Univ. Press, 2001.
[7] L. Fei-Fei and P. Perona. A Bayesian hierarchical
model for learning natural scene categories. In
CVPR, 2005.
[8] T. Griffiths and M. Steyvers. Probabilistic topic
models. In Latent Semantic Analysis: A Road to
Meaning. 2006.
[9] T. L. Griffiths and M. Steyvers. Finding scientific
topics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 101 Suppl 1:5228–
5235, April 2004.

[10] D. Harman. Overview of the first text retrieval
conference (TREC-1). In TREC-1, 1992.
[11] T. Hofmann. Probabilistic latent semantic analysis. In UAI, 1999.
[12] M. I. Jordan, Z. Ghahramani, T. Jaakkola, and
L. K. Saul. An introduction to variational methods for graphical models. Machine Learning,
37(2):183–233, 1999.
[13] R. Kalman. A new approach to linear filtering and
prediction problems. Transaction of the AMSE:
Journal of Basic Engineering, 82:35–45, 1960.
[14] G. F. Lawler. Introduction to Stochastic Processes. Chapman & Hall/CRC, 1995.

small AP, time stamp prediction

election 08, time stamp prediction

900
w

800

d

h

w+d

w+d+h

m

w

d

m+w

m+w+d

700

baseline

average absolute error (day)

average absolute error (hour)

200

600
500
400
300
200

baseline
150

100

50

100
0

1 topic

3 topics

5 topics

0

10 topics

1 topic

3 topics

(a)

5 topics

10 topics

(b)

Figure 6: Time stamp prediction. ‘m’ stands for flat approach of ‘month’, ‘w’ for ‘week’, ‘d’ for ‘day’ and and ‘h’
for ‘hour.’ ‘m+w’ stands for the hierarchical approach of combining ‘month’ and ‘week’, and ‘m+w+d’, ‘w+d’,
‘w+d+h’ are similarly defined. The baseline is the expectation of the error by randomly assigning a time. (a)
AP data. 5-topic and 10-topic models perform better than others, and the hierarchical approach always achieves
the best performance. (b) Election 08 data. 1-topic model performs best due to the short documents. The
hierarchical approach achieves comparable performances.
2/27/2007

4/24/2007

6/26/2007

8/28/2007

10/23/2007

12/25/2007

2/19/2008

healthcare
abc
wisconsin
vegas
superdelegate
nevada
delegate
civil
recount
florida

healthcare
abc
wisconsin
vegas
superdelegate
nevada
delegate
civil
fundraising
recount

healthcare
wisconsin
vegas
superdelegate
nevada
abc
fundraising
delegate
civil
florida

healthcare
wisconsin
vegas
superdelegate
kucinich
nevada
fundraising
delegate
florida
civil

kucinich
ron
obama
healthcare
paul
wisconsin
vegas
superdelegate
iowa
nevada

obama
clinton
paul
ron
kucinich
hillary
iowa
campaign
new
barack

obama
clinton
hillary
barack
campaign
democratic
iowa
kucinich
paul
ron

Figure 7: Examples from a 3-topic cDTM using the week model in the Election 08 data. In year 2007, the topics
were more about general issues, while around year 2008, were more about candidates and changing faster.
[15] A. McCallum, A. Corrada-Emmanuel, and
X. Wang. Topic and role discovery in social networks. In IJCAI, 2005.

[21] G. E. Uhlenbeck and L. S. Ornstein. On the theory of Brownian motion. Phys. Rev., 36:823–41,
1930.

[16] J. Nocedal and S. J. Wright. Numerical Optimization. Springer, 2006.

[22] M. J. Wainwright and M. I. Jordan. Graphical
models, exponential families and variational inference. Technical Report 649, UC Berkeley, Dept.
of Statistics, 2003.

[17] M. Opper and G. Sanguinetti. Variational inference for markov jump processes. In NIPS, 2007.
[18] S. Rogers, M. Girolami, C. Campbell, and R. Breitling. The latent process decomposition of cDNA
microarray data sets. IEEE/ACM Trans. on
Comp. Bio. and Bioinf., 2(2):143–156, 2005.
[19] M. Rosen-Zvi, T. Griffiths, M. Steyvers, and
P. Smyth. The author-topic model for authors
and documents. In UAI, 2004.
[20] Y. W. Teh, D. Newman, and M. Welling. A
collapsed variational bayesian inference algorithm
for latent Dirichlet allocation. In NIPS, 2006.

[23] X. Wang and A. McCallum. Topics over time:
A non-Markov continuous-time model of topical
trends. In SIGKDD, 2006.
[24] X. Wei and B. Croft. LDA-based document models for ad-hoc retrieval. In SIGIR, 2006.
[25] X. Wei, J. Sun, and X. Wang. Dynamic mixture
models for multiple time series. In IJCAI, 2007.
[26] M. West and J. Harrison. Bayesian Forecasting
and Dynamic Models. Springer, 1997.

