BHATTACHARJYA & SHACHTER

9

Evaluating influence diagrams with decision circuits

Debarun Bhattacharjya and Ross D. Shachter
Department of Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
E-mail: debarunb@stanford.edu, shachter@stanford.edu

Abstract
Although a number of related algorithms
have been developed to evaluate influence
diagrams, exploiting the conditional independence in the diagram, the exact solution has remained intractable for many important problems. In this paper we introduce decision circuits as a means to exploit
the local structure usually found in decision
problems and to improve the performance
of influence diagram analysis. This work
builds on the probabilistic inference algorithms using arithmetic circuits to represent
Bayesian belief networks [Darwiche, 2003].
Once compiled, these arithmetic circuits efficiently evaluate probabilistic queries on the
belief network, and methods have been developed to exploit both the global and local
structure of the network. We show that decision circuits can be constructed in a similar
fashion and promise similar benefits.

1988; Shachter, 1988; Shachter and Peot, 1992]. Darwiche’s (2003) recent work on arithmetic circuits has
demonstrated the power of using both local structure
(in the form of determinism and context-specific independence) and global structure (conditional independence) for probabilistic inference in belief networks.
In this paper, we show how the concepts of arithmetic
circuits can be used to evaluate influence diagrams efficiently, either directly or in a modified form we call
decision circuits.
Inference on belief networks using arithmetic circuits
has been shown to perform at least as well as the stateof-the-art jointree methods [Park and Darwiche, 2004].
The challenge is to construct even better circuits than
those corresponding to jointrees. Some techniques that
use local structure have recently been devised [Darwiche 2002a; Chavira and Darwiche, 2005] and experimental results show that compact circuits can be constructed for belief networks with high treewidth and
sufficient local structure [Chavira and Darwiche, 2005;
Chavira et al, 2006]. These methods are based on
propositional theories and conversion from one logical
form to another [Darwiche, 2001; Darwiche 2002b].

Influence diagrams were introduced as a representation to facilitate communication in practical decision
problems [Howard and Matheson, 1984]. They have
also proven to be powerful computational aids. Exact
methods for evaluating influence diagrams either work
directly on the influence diagram [Shachter, 1986], or
on related graphical structures such as valuation networks [Shenoy, 1992] or junction trees [Shachter and
Peot, 1992; Jensen et al, 1994].

In this paper, we show how decision circuits can be
constructed and evaluated. Decision circuits are constrained by the order restrictions dictated by which
uncertainties have been observed at the time decisions
are made. Nonetheless, decision problems in practice have considerable local structure from asymmetry
and conditional alternatives, and previous research has
shown how exploiting local structure can improve efficiency [Gomez and Cano, 2003]. The recent advances
in arithmetic circuits could be used to evaluate practical decision problems for which traditional approaches
have proven intractable.

Advances in Bayesian belief network computation have
often led to new approaches to evaluate influence diagrams. Earlier research work has shown the correspondence between probabilistic inference algorithms and
methods for evaluating influence diagrams [Cooper,

In section 2, we review the concepts of influence diagrams using some simple examples. We briefly summarize some of the previous literature on arithmetic
circuits in section 3. We demonstrate how all influence diagrams can be solved directly using arithmetic

1

INTRODUCTION

10

BHATTACHARJYA & SHACHTER

circuits in section 4. Decision circuits are introduced
in section 5. We show how to construct decision circuits from variable elimination and establish that they
can be created in time and space of the same complexity as existing state-of-the-art methods. We present
methods for finding the optimal policy and the maximal expected utility. Finally, section 6 describes our
conclusions and directions for future work.

2

a)

W

B

W
b)

U

B

INFLUENCE DIAGRAMS

In this section we introduce the concepts and notation
of belief networks and influence diagrams that we will
use throughout the paper. These models represent the
beliefs of a single rational decision maker.
Both Bayesian belief networks and influence diagrams
are directed acyclic graphical models for reasoning under uncertainty. All of the nodes in a belief network
correspond to uncertain variables, while influence diagrams also include decisions and values. Variables
are denoted by upper-case letters (X) and their values by lower-case letters (x). A bold-faced letter indicates a set of variables. We will refer interchangeably
to a node in the diagram and the corresponding variable. We will draw uncertainties as ovals, decisions
as rectangles and values as diamonds. The parents of
an uncertain or value variable condition its probability
distribution. If X is a variable with parents U, then
XU = X ∪ U is called the family for variable X. On
the other hand, the parents of a decision variable are
those variables whose values will be observed before
the decision must be made.
Consider the three examples shown in Figure 1. Figure 1a presents a belief network with two nodes, labelled W (Weather) and B (Bring umbrella). We are
interested in knowing whether a friend will bring an
umbrella, and our belief can be different if we observe
the weather. If there were no arc between nodes W
and B, then we would be asserting that observing the
weather would not change our belief about the umbrella. Figure 1b shows the influence diagram for a
simple decision problem in which our friend chooses
whether to bring an umbrella based on her belief about
the weather and her preferences, represented by the
node U (Utility). She ranks her preferences for all
possible prospects of weather and umbrella using a
von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function [von Neumann and Morgenstern, 1947], where having U = 1
is at least as good as anything that can happen, and
having U = 0 is at least as bad. Thus, she can represent her preferences by the probability that U = 1
for each prospect. Figure 1c shows the influence diagram for a more complicated decision problem, where
she can Gather evidence (G), such as to purchase a

R
c)
W
B
G
U

Figure 1: Some influence diagram examples.

weather Report (R). Her information gathering decision and the report will be known to her when she
decides whether to bring her umbrella. We re-visit
these examples in later sections.
When decisions are represented by separate nodes, as
shown in Figure 1c, the diagram is said to be in extensive form. Alternatively, when there is only one decision node and it has no parents, as shown in Figure
1b, the diagram is said to be in normal form [Savage, 1954; Raiffa, 1968]. In fact, we can convert any
diagram in extensive form to one in normal form by
considering different strategies, one for each possible
combination of observed uncertainties and decision alternatives. Therefore, the number of strategies can
be very large, and it is often much more efficient to
maintain the problem in extensive form.
The choice of Strategy (S) makes all of the decisions
deterministic functions of the uncertainties which will
be observed beforehand. For example, the diagram
shown in Figure 2 represents the normal form of the
diagram shown in Figure 1c. There is a single strategy
decision, while the other decisions become deterministic functions (shown as double ovals) of the strategy
and the observed uncertainties. Each strategy includes
a choice for gathering information and a choice for
bringing umbrella for each possible value of weather
report.
Although influence diagrams with multiple additive or
multiplicative value nodes can provide some additional
computational savings [Tatman and Shachter, 1990],
we assume there is a single value node for readability

BHATTACHARJYA & SHACHTER

11

stantiation of all of the variables in the network and
xu ∼ x represents all families consistent with x.
S

R

W
G

B

U

Figure 2: Normal form for the influence diagram shown
in Figure 1c.

and simplicity.
The general problem we are solving is to determine the
decisions D that maximize P (U = 1) when the variables E have already been observed and the parents of
each decision D are observed before it is made. It is
inconsistent to make observations that tell us anything
about the decisions we are yet to make, so we require
that E not be responsive in any way to D [Heckerman
and Shachter, 1995]. This is enforced by not allowing the nodes in E to be descendants of the nodes in
D. Another inconsistency arises if information known
before one decision is made is not known before subsequent decisions. To be a valid influence diagram for
a rational individual there must exist at least one “no
forgetting” ordering of the decisions such that all earlier observations and decisions are observed before any
later decisions are made.

3

ARITHMETIC CIRCUITS

We explain basic concepts regarding arithmetic circuits [Darwiche, 2003]; in section 5 we will introduce
decision circuits as an extension.
Belief networks are associated with a unique multilinear function over two kinds of variables, evidence
indicators and network parameters. An evidence indicator λx is associated with each possible instantation x of each network variable X. Similarly, there
is a network parameter θx|u for each possible instantation xu of family XU. The network parameters represent the conditional probabilities, θx|u = P (x|u), and
the evidence indicators are binary (0-1) variables, with
λx = 0 whenever X has been observed taking another
value. Each term in the multi-linear function corresponds to one instantiation x of all the network variables X, and is the product of all evidence indicators
and network parameters consistent with x. In general, P
theQmulti-linear function for a belief network is
f = x xu∼x λx θx|u where the sum is over every in-

Consider the belief network of Figure 1a. Suppose
there are two possible states for the weather, w and w̄,
and two states for whether our friend brings an umbrella, b and b̄. The multi-linear function for this network is f = λw λb θw θb|w + λw̄ λb θw̄ θb|w̄ + λw λb̄ θw θb̄|w +
λw̄ λb̄ θw̄ θb̄|w̄ .
This function has several special properties for answering inference queries. By setting the evidence indicators to 0 or 1, we can find the probability of observing
any set of network variables E. For instance, if we
assign evidence to be e = b̄ by setting λb = 0 and all
the other three evidence indicators as 1, the function
returns P (b̄) = θw θb̄|w + θw̄ θb̄|w̄ . The general procedure involves setting all of the evidence indicators to
be consistent with the evidence e to compute P (e).
Furthermore, the partial derivatives of the multi-linear
function are also related to common probabilistic inference queries. Suppose e is evidence on network variables E and X is any random variable (X may or may
not be in E). e − X signifies the evidence such that
any instantiation of X is retracted. We list lemmas
with some important results on partial derivatives as
proven in Darwiche (2003).
Lemma 1. For every variable X and evidence e, we
∂f
(e).
have: P (x, e − X) = ∂λ
x
Lemma 2. For every
X and evidence e, we
P variable
∂f
(e).
have: P (e − X) = x ∂λ
x
Lemma 3. For every family XU and evidence e, we
have: P (x, u, e) = θx|u ∂θ∂f
(e).
x|u
In general, there are an exponential number of terms
in the multi-linear function associated with a belief
network. Nonetheless, it can be efficiently represented,
evaluated, and differentiated using arithmetic circuits.
Definition 1. An arithmetic circuit is a rooted, directed acyclic graph whose leaf nodes are constants or
variables and all other nodes represent either summation or multiplication. The size of an arithmetic circuit is the number of edges it contains.
The arithmetic circuit for our simple belief network
from Figure 1a is shown in Figure 3. Note that the
value of the multi-linear function is computed at the
root, hence an upward pass, starting from the leaves
and ending at the root, will compute f (e), where
f (e) = P (e). This process is also known as evaluating
the circuit.
We can calculate partial derivatives through a subsequent downward pass, in which the parents are visited
before the children. This is known as differentiating
the circuit, and is a bit more involved than the up-

12

BHATTACHARJYA & SHACHTER
and initialize θs = 1/NS ∀ s and any desired subset of evidence indicators for e. Compile to obtain
an arithmetic circuit.

+

*

λw
θw

*

+

*

λw

+

*

*

*

θw

2. Sweep up and down the circuit with evidence e0 =
e ∪ {U = 1}.
df
0
dλs (e ),

3. The optimal strategy s∗ = arg maxs

θ b |w λ b θ b |w θ b |w λ b θ b | w
Figure 3: Arithmetic circuit for the belief network shown
in Figure 1a.

ward pass. Let v be an arbitrary node in the circuit
and also its value (determined in the upward sweep).
Similarly, f denotes the root node and also its value,
the output of the circuit. We are interested in the
partial derivative ∂f /∂v for all nodes v, recognizing
that f is a function of all of the node values. If v
is the root node f , then ∂f /∂v = 1. For any other
node v, with parents p in the circuit, we can use the
chain rule of differential
P ∂f ∂p calculus to write the derivatives as ∂f
=
p ∂p ∂v . If p is a multiplication node,
∂v
Q
Q
∂(v v0 v 0 )
∂p
= v0Pv 0 . Otherwise p is a summa∂v =
∂v
∂(v+

v0 )

∂p
v0
tion node, ∂v
=
= 1, where v 0 are the
∂v
other children of parent p. Note that p can never be
a variable or a constant because they are leaves in the
arithmetic circuit. By sweeping down, ∂f /∂v can be
computed for all nodes, since the derivatives ∂f /∂p for
all its parents will have already been computed.

To summarise, we recursively obtain the values v in an
upward pass and then recursively compute the derivatives in a downward pass. The upward and downward
passes are also referred to as sweeps. For further details regarding arithmetic circuits, please see Darwiche
(2003).

4

EVALUATING INFLUENCE
DIAGRAMS WITH
ARITHMETIC CIRCUITS

In this section, we present an algorithm to evaluate
influence diagrams by converting them to arithmetic
circuits.
Normal Form Algorithm: Given an influence diagram and evidence e, determine the optimal strategy
s∗ and maximal expected utility (MEU).
1. Convert the influence diagram to normal form, if
it is not already in normal form. Let S be the
strategy variable and let NS be the number of
possible strategies. Represent S as an uncertainty

the optimal M EU =

∂f
0
∂λs∗ (e ) NS
∂f
∂f
0
0
∂λu (e )+ ∂λū (e )

and

.

Theorem 1. Every influence diagram can be evaluated with one upward and one downward sweep on an
arithmetic circuit, using the normal form algorithm.
Proof. Given an influence diagram in normal form,
there is a single decision node with no parents. By
treating that strategy as an uncertainty to be observed at its different values, the diagram can be represented by an arithmetic circuit. Following the approaches of Cooper (1988) and Shachter and Peot
(1992), P (U = 1|s, e) = P (U = 1, s, e)/P (s, e) but
P (s, e) = P (s)P (e) is constant by the initialization of
θs and because e must be unresponsive to s. Therefore,
s∗

=

arg max P (U = 1|s, e)

=

arg max P (U = 1, s, e)

=

arg max

s

s

s

df 0
(e ),
dλs

where the last step follows from Lemma 1. Similarly,
M EU

= P (U = 1|s∗ , e)
P (U = 1, s∗ , e)
=
P (s∗ )P (e)
=

∂f
∂λs∗
∂f
0
∂λu (e )

(e0 )NS
+

∂f
0
∂λū (e )

,

where the last step follows from Lemmas 1 and 2.
Thus, any influence diagram can be evaluated in a
single upward and downward sweep through an arithmetic circuit. The partial derivatives at the end of the
second sweep allow us to compute the optimal policy
and the MEU. The same arithmetic circuit can be used
again with different evidence e, which makes it easy to
perform some value of information calculations. If we
want to analyze multiple queries on the model at the
optimal policy, then we can add s∗ to the evidence,
and we can even compile the model with that observation. When the decision has been replaced by an
optimal policy, we call the resulting diagram a policy
diagram [Shachter and Kenley, 1989] and its circuit a
policy arithmetic circuit.

BHATTACHARJYA & SHACHTER
Unfortunately, the number of strategies NS in a normal form influence diagram can be prohibitively large,
since it assumes that any observations needed for one
decision will be needed for all subsequent decisions. In
experiments we ran on the influence diagram shown
in Figure 1c, using the publicly available ACE system (http://reasoning.cs.ucla.edu/ace) with two possible values each for G, R, W, and B, the computed
arithmetic circuit comprised 86 nodes and 134 edges.
There are alternative methods to convert influence diagrams into arithmetic circuits, some involving multiple compilations or the introduction of strategies for
subsets of the decisions. We can imagine different influence diagrams for which one or another of these approaches would be better than the normal form algorithm. It seems even better in many cases, however,
to maintain the original diagram in extensive form and
modify the arithmetic circuit so that it can optimize
over decisions, and we present these modified circuits
in the next section.

5

DECISION CIRCUITS

Influence diagrams in extensive form can be evaluated
using decision circuits. Along with the summation and
multiplication nodes in arithmetic circuits, there are
maximization nodes to make decisions. Decision circuits are similar to the modified arithmetic circuits introduced recently [Chan and Darwiche, 2006; Huang
et al, 2006], except that the goal is to solve a decision
problem.
5.1

Preliminaries

5.2

13

Constructing decision circuits in the
variable elimination order

Any valid influence diagram can be represented as a
decision circuit. Decision circuits can be constructed
in the variable elimination order with a bottom-up
approach, based on the arithmetic circuit construction in Darwiche (2000). An alternative, top-down
approach, based on junction trees, would be similar to
the method in Park and Darwiche (2004), and would
produce a similar decision circuit.
The factors (also known as potentials in the literature)
associated with each variable are usually conditional
probability tables. For our construction, our symbolic
factors are the product of the evidence indicator and
network parameter. Hence for a variable X and its
parents U, the factor φ(x, u) = λx θx|u .
Variable elimination for an influence diagram has some
order restrictions not needed in variable elimination
for a belief network. If X is observed before decision
D then it should be eliminated after D, and otherwise it should be eliminated before D. Given any
valid elimination order on the diagram, with the utility node being the first node to be eliminated, we can
now construct a decision circuit bottom-up to perform
the standard variable elimination operations, taking
expectation for uncertainties and maximizing for decisions.
Let us demonstrate this by constructing a decision circuit for the example in Figure 1b. The factors for the
three families are: φ(W ), φ(B), and φ(U W B). The
only valid elimination order is U ≺ W ≺ B because
W is not observed before decision B is made. If g is

Definition 2. A decision circuit is a rooted, directed
acyclic graph whose leaf nodes are labelled with variables or constants and whose other nodes are either
summation, multiplication, or maximization.
In the same way that arithmetic circuits compute the
value of a multi-linear function over the input variables, decision circuits compute the value of a backward dynamic programming function. The output,
denoted by g, is computed at the root through an
upward sweep, and partial derivatives are computed
through a subsequent downward sweep. On the downward sweep, maximization nodes should be treated as
if they were summation nodes.
The efficiency of decision circuit evaluation depends
critically on the circuit choice, so it might be worthwhile to invest considerable time compiling a decision
circuit even when it will be used only once. In the next
section, we specify a particular method for constructing these circuits, but improved circuits are an open
area of research.

max

*

λb
θb
+

*

+

*

λb

+

*

*

θb

*

λw θ w θ w λw

+

**

*

*

θ u |b w
θ u |b w
θ u |b w θ u |b w

+

*

+

**

*

θ u |b w

λu λu

θ u |b w

θ u |b w θ u |b w

Figure 4: Decision circuit for the influence diagram shown
in Figure 1b.

14

BHATTACHARJYA & SHACHTER

the output for the circuit,
XX
g = max
φ(w)φ(b)φ(w, b, u)
b

=

w

max φ(b)
b

= max λb θb
b

u

X

φ(w)

X

w

φ(w, b, u)

u

X

λw θ w

w

X

λu θu|w,b

u

moving the summation inside and replacing the factors with the corresponding evidence indicators and
network parameters. The decision circuit constructed
from this process is shown in Figure 4.
5.3

Evaluating influence diagrams with
decision circuits

In this section, we present an algorithm using the
constructed decision circuits to evaluate influence diagrams.
Decision Circuit Algorithm: Given an influence diagram and evidence e, determine the optimal policies
θd|u and maximal expected utility (MEU).
1. Construct a decision circuit for the influence diagram, initializing λd = 1 and all θd|u = 1 for each
decision alternative d.
2. Sweep up and down the circuit with evidence e0 =
e ∪ {U = 1}. At each maximization node on the
way up, choose the alternative d∗ with the highest
value, breaking ties arbitrarily, and set θd|u = 0
for all other alternatives d.
3. The optimal M EU =

∂g
∂λu

g ∗ (e0 )
.
∂g
(e0 )
(e0 )+ ∂λ
ū

For example, consider the circuit shown in Figure 4.
Assuming that there is no evidence e = ∅, we set all
the evidence indicators to 1, except λū , which is 0. We
also initialize θb and θb̄ to 1, corresponding to the two
alternatives. If b is optimal, we set θb̄ to 0.
Theorem 2. Every influence diagram can be evaluated with one upward and one downward sweep on a
decision circuit constructed in variable elimination order, using the decision circuit algorithm.
Proof. First, we want to show that each maximization node will select the best alternative unless the
observation before that decision is inconsistent with
the evidence e, rendering the choice moot. Consider
the first decision D in the variable elimination order
(i.e., D is the decision that will be made latest), and
let d be any particular alternative for D. Partition
the variables into three sets, A, B, and {U, D}, where
B ∪ {U } are the variables that are eliminated before

D, and A are the variables eliminated after D. Let a
be any particular instantiation of A.
By the construction of the decision circuit, there is a
maximization node for D corresponding to observation
a, with each of its children corresponding to an alternative d. Let the value corresponding to that child be
denoted by vd . By the construction of the circuit, all
of the variables in B are eliminated in the process of
computing that value, so
vd = λd θd|a P (U = 1, eB |d, a) = P (U = 1, eB |d, a)
where eB is the evidence involving the variables in
B. However, that evidence cannot be responsive to
D, so P (eB |d, a) = P (eB |a). Therefore, unless that
evidence is inconsistent with a making P (eB |a) = 0,
we obtain that
P (U = 1|d, a, eB ) =

vd
P (U = 1, eB |d, a)
=
P (eB |a)
P (eB |a)

Since all of these expressions are nonnegative, maximizing over vd corresponds to maximizing over P (U =
1|d, a, eB ), as desired, and the optimal policy is determined. If vd is maximal then the value computed at
the maximization node is vd . This process can then
be performed on each subsequent decision in the elimination order.
The value computed at the root node will be g ∗ (e0 ) =
P (U = 1, e) at the optimal policies for all of the decisions. The MEU can then be computed as in Theorem
1.
The decision circuit algorithm using a circuit constructed in variable elimination order can be analyzed in the same way as arithmetic circuits constructed in variable elimination order by Darwiche
(2000). Key parameters are the number of nodes n
and the treewidth w of the elimination order, which
reflects the efficiency of that elimination order under
the order restrictions. This makes it competitive with
the best current algorithms for evaluating influence diagrams [Jensen et al, 1994].
Lemma 4. A decision circuit constructed in variable
elimination order has time and space complexity of the
order of O(n exp(w)).
Theorem 3. Evaluating an influence diagram using
a decision circuit has time complexity no worse than
the order of O(n exp(w)).
Proof. A sweep through the decision circuit is linear
in the size of the circuit, and is thus O(n exp(w))
from the result on space complexity of the circuit in
Lemma 4. Evaluating an influence diagram entails
constructing a decision circuit, and performing two

BHATTACHARJYA & SHACHTER
sweeps. Each of these three tasks is O(n exp(w)).
Hence the entire process has time complexity of the
order of O(n exp(w)).

6

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE
RESEARCH

Decision circuits can be used to evaluate and analyze
influence diagrams efficiently, and they are a natural
extension to arithmetic circuits. In this paper, we
have shown their construction in variable elimination
order, which does not fully exploit the asymmetry in
most practical problems. Techniques using local structure could create even more compact circuits, and that
would be especially valuable if the circuit were used
to answer multiple queries or to respond in real time.
This would create opportunities to address important
problems for which exact solutions have remained intractable.
A significant advantage of arithmetic and decision circuits over traditional methods is that they provide
a wealth of information for sensitivity analysis as a
byproduct of the two sweeps. The partial derivatives
and higher order derivatives answer many important
sensitivity analysis queries [Darwiche, 2000; Darwiche,
2003; Chan and Darwiche, 2004]. In the case of decision problems, value of information analysis can be
performed by evaluating the decision circuit at different evidence instantiations.
The algorithms in this paper could be enhanced by
a simple preprocessing step now standard in the literature [Shachter, 1998; Nielsen and Jensen, 1999;
Shachter, 1999]. Using the global structure of the influence diagram, we can determine a subset of the observations available at the time of the decision that are
actually requisite or sufficient to be observed to make
the best decision. This can significantly reduce the
number of strategies or optimal policies to be computed, reducing the time and space needed. This
approach could potentially be extended to the local
structure as well, incorporating the asymmetry in most
practical problems of the requisite observations needed
to make decisions.
Another easy enhancement is a modeling feature that
would allow the parents of a decision to be conditional
as well as informational. If a particular decision alternative d is not available for some instantiation of the
observations at the time the decision is made, u, this
could be represented in the network parameters at initialization, setting θd|u = 0, much the same as analysis
could be performed without a particular alternative d
by initializing its evidence indicator, setting λd = 0.
This adds some significant modeling power at no com-

15

putational cost.
Once the optimal policies have been determined using
a decision circuit, or any particular strategy has been
specified, we can transform the influence diagram into
a policy diagram by treating the decision nodes as uncertainties and using the policies as conditional probabilities. This allows us to perform multiple queries
under a particular policy. This analysis can be done
in the decision circuit itself, but it may be even better
to compile a policy arithmetic circuit, the arithmetic
circuit for the policy diagram, instead. Since there
are no order restrictions on the policy arithmetic circuit, state-of-the-art approaches could be used to construct the best possible circuit, exploiting the determinism introduced by the decision policies themselves.
In that case, the decision circuit algorithm and the policy arithmetic circuit compilation could be performed
offline, and queries on the compact policy circuit could
be analyzed efficiently online.
Acknowledgements
This research was partially funded by the Global Climate Energy Project. We thank John Weyant for his
support, the UCLA Automated Reasoning Group for
the use of their software, and the anonymous reviewers
for their feedback.
References
Chan, H., and Darwiche, A., 2004, Sensitivity analysis
in Bayesian networks: From single to multiple parameters, In Chickering, M., and Halpern, J., editors, Proceedings of the Twentieth Conference on Uncertainty
in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 67–75, Banff, Canada:
AUAI Press, Arlington, Virginia.
Chan, H., and Darwiche, A., 2006, On the robustness
of Most Probable Explanations, In Proceedings of the
Twenty Second Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 63–71, Cambridge, MA, USA:
Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, California.
Chavira, M., and Darwiche, A., 2005, Compiling
Bayesian networks with local structure, In Proceedings
of the Nineteenth International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, Edinburgh, Scotland, pp. 1306–
1312.
Chavira, M., Darwiche, A., and Jaeger, M., 2006,
Compiling relational Bayesian networks for exact inference, International Journal of Approximate Reasoning, 42, pp. 4–20.
Cooper, G., 1988, A method for using belief networks
as influence diagrams, In Shachter, R., Levitt, T.,
Kanal, L., and Lemmer, J., editors, Proceedings of the
Fourth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intel-

16

BHATTACHARJYA & SHACHTER

ligence, pp. 55–63, Minneapolis, MN, USA: Elsevier
Science, New York, NY.
Darwiche, A., 2000, A differential approach to inference in Bayesian networks, In Boutilier, C., and Goldszmidt, M., editors, Proceedings of the Sixteenth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp.
123–132, Stanford, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann, San
Mateo, California.

cision scenarios, In Laskey, K., and Prade, H., editors, Proceedings of the Fifteenth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 502–511, Stockholm, Sweden: Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, California.
Park, J., and Darwiche, A., 2004, A differential semantics for jointree algorithms, Artificial Intelligence,
156, pp. 197–216.

Darwiche, A., 2001, Decomposable negation normal
form, Journal of the ACM, 48(4), pp. 608–647.

Raiffa, H., 1968, Decision Analysis: Introductory Lectures on Choices under Uncertainty, Addison-Wesley.

Darwiche, A., 2002a, A logical approach to factoring
belief networks, In Proceedings of International Conference on Knowledge Representation and Reasoning,
pp. 409–420.

Savage, L., 1954, The Foundations of Statistics, Wiley,
New York.

Darwiche, A., 2002b, A compiler for deterministic, decomposable negation normal form, In Proceedings of
the Eighteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Menlo Park, CA, USA, pp. 627–634: AAAI
Press.
Darwiche, A., 2003, A differential approach to inference in Bayesian networks, Journal of the ACM,
50(3), pp. 280–305.
Gomez, M., and Cano, A., 2003, Applying numerical trees to evaluate asymmetric decision problems, In
Nielsen, T., and Zhang, N., Symbolic and Quantitative Approaches to Reasoning with Uncertainty, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, 2711, pp. 196–
207: Springer-Verlag.
Heckerman, D., and Shachter, R., 1995, A definition
and graphical representation for causality, In Besnard,
P., and Hanks, S., editors, Proceedings of the Eleventh
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
pp. 262–273, Montreal, QU, Canada: Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, California.
Howard, R., and Matheson, J., 1984, Influence diagrams, In Howard, R., and Matheson, J., editors, Influence diagrams, belief nets, and decision analysis, pp.
3–23, Wiley, Chichester.
Huang, J., Chavira, M., and Darwiche, A., 2006,
Solving MAP exactly by searching on compiled arithmetic circuits, In Proceedings of the Twenty-First National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Boston,
MA, USA, pp 143–148.
Jensen, F., Jensen, F. V., and Dittmer, S., 1994, From
influence diagrams to junction trees, In Lopez de Mantaras, R., and Poole, D., editors, Proceedings of the
Tenth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 367–373, Seattle, WA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, California.
Nielsen, T., and Jensen, F. V, 1999, Well-defined de-

Shachter, R., 1986, Evaluating influence diagrams,
Operations Research, 34 (November-December), pp.
871–882.
Shachter, R., 1988, Probabilistic inference and influence diagrams, Operations Research, 36 (JulyAugust), pp. 589–605.
Shachter, R., 1998, Bayes-ball: The rational pastime
(for determining irrelevance and requisite information
in belief networks and influence diagrams), In Cooper,
G., and Moral, S., editors, Proceedings of the Fourteenth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 480–487, Madison, WI, USA: Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, California.
Shachter, R., 1999, Efficient value of information computation, In Laskey, K., and Prade, H., editors, Proceedings of the Fifteenth Conference on Uncertainty in
Artificial Intelligence, pp. 594–601, Stockholm, Sweden: Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, California.
Shachter, R., and Kenley, C., 1989, Gaussian influence
diagrams, Management Science, 35 (May), pp. 589–
605.
Shachter, R., and Peot, M., 1992, Decision making
using probabilistic inference methods, In Dubois, D.,
Wellman, M. P., D’Ambrosio, B., and Smets, P., editors, Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 276–283, Stanford,
California: Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, California.
Shenoy, P., 1992, Valuation based systems for Bayesian
decision analysis, Operations Research, 40 (MayJune), pp. 463–484.
Tatman, J., and Shachter, R., 1990, Dynamic programming and influence diagrams, IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 20(2), pp. 365–
379.
von Neumann, J., and Morgenstern, O., 1947, Theory of Games and Economic Behavior, 2nd edition,
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

