Pertinent Information retrieval based on Possibilistic Bayesian
network : origin and possibilistic perspective
Kamel Garrouch1, Mohamed Nazih Omri2, Bachir el Ayeb2
1
ISSAT Sousse, TUNISIA – kamelg_2001@yahoo.fr
2
FSM Monastir, TUNISIA – nazih.omri@ipeim.rnu.tn
2
FSM Monastir, TUNISIA – ayeb_b@yahoo.com

Abstract—In this paper we present a synthesis of work
performed on tow information retrieval models:
Bayesian network information retrieval model witch encode
(in) dependence relation between terms and possibilistic
network information retrieval model witch make use of
necessity and possibility measures to represent the fuzziness of
pertinence measure. It is known that the use of a general
Bayesian network methodology as the basis for an IR system is
difficult to tackle. The problem mainly appears because of the
large number of variables involved and the computational
efforts needed to both determine the relationships between
variables and perform the inference processes. To resolve these
problems, many models have been proposed such as BNR
model. Generally, Bayesian network models doesn't consider
the fuzziness of natural language in the relevance measure of a
document to a given query and possibilistic models doesn’t
undertake the dependence relations between terms used to
index documents. As a first solution we propose a hybridization
of these two models in one that will undertake both the
relationship between terms and the intrinsic fuzziness of natural
language. We believe that the translation of Bayesian network
model from the probabilistic framework to possibilistic one will
allow a performance improvement of BNRM.
Keywords: information retrieval, Bayesian network,
possibilistic network.

I. INTRODUCTION

T

he field of information retrieval (IR) has been defined by
Salton [10] as the subject concerned with the
representation, storage, organization, and accessing of
information items. The IR process consists in selecting
among a large collection a set of documents that are relevant
to a user’s query.
Given a document collection, the first step to operate with an
IRS, is to characterize the content of the document, task
called indexing. It obtains a representation of each document
in a suitable form to be managed by a computer. The result is
a set of keywords or terms extracted from each text that
should appropriately express the content of the document.
Because they are not equally important, these terms could be
weighted to highlight their importance in the documents they
belong, as well as in the whole collection. A weighted
indexed document could be Dj = {( t l j ,w lj), ..., ( t k j , w kj)),
where each wij is the weight associated to the corresponding
1

This work is supported by the research unit PRINCE.

term. Usually, we use the weight known as tf/idf weight. In
this case, the value associated to a term is computed
multiplying the frequency of the term in that document (tf)
by the inverse document frequency (idf) of the term in the
collection.
When the indexing process has finished and the collection is
ready to be used, a user interacts with the IRS by means of a
query. That query is a description of the user’s information
need, and must be also indexed to produce a representation
which can be handled by the system. The next step is the
retrieval of those documents which are the most relevant to
the query. The matching process is based on the search
strategy implemented by the corresponding model. The result
of this stage is a ranking of documents sorted by the
proximity of each document to the query.
The set of retrieved documents in answer to a query does not
usually correspond to the set of documents that are relevant
to the user need. The relevance of a document to a query is
usually interpreted by most of IR models, vector space,
Boolean, probabilistic, as a score computed by summing the
inner products of term weights in the documents and query
representations. Whatever the used model, the response to a
user need is a list of documents ranked according to a
relevance value.
Generally most information retrieval model suffers from two
drawbacks. The first one is related to the process of indexing
and the second problem is related to relevance measure.
These problems are caused by the fuzzy nature of natural
language and by the semantic ambiguity of words.
Most model of IR doesn’t consider these problems. To deal
with the first problem Bayesian network model for IR has
been proposed by de Campos [14] as solution. To deal with
the second one, Brini [1] have proposed a IR model based on
possibility theory.
Following these ideas, this paper is divided into the
following sections: in Section 2, we introduce the Bayesian
network background needed to understand the rest of the
paper, we present its use in IR field and we explain the
Bayesian Network Retrieval Model (BNRM). Section 3
presents the possibilistic model for information retrieval.
Section 4 shows the conclusions, as well as future work that
we plan to make in order to improve retrieval performance.

II. BAYESIAN NETWORK
A Bayesian network is a directed acyclic graph (DAG), in
which the nodes represent random variables and the arcs
show causality, relevance or dependency relationships
between them. The variables and their relationships comprise
the qualitative knowledge stored in a Bayesian network. A
second type of knowledge also stored in the DAG is known
as quantitative. Associated with each node there is a set of
conditional probability distributions, one for each possible
combination of values that its parents can take. It establishes
the strength of the relationships and is measured by means of
probability distributions.
Bayesian network can be considered as an efficient
representation of a joint probability distribution that takes
into account the set of independence relationships
represented in the graphical component of the model. In
general terms, given a set of variables {X1, …, Xn}and a
Bayesian network G, the joint probability distribution in
terms of local conditional probabilities is obtained as follows
n

P(X 1 , …, X n ) = ∏ P( X i π ( X i ))
i =1

π ( X i ) is any combination of the values of parent
set of Xi, Π (X i ) , in the graph. If Xi has no parents, then
the set Π (X i ) is empty, and therefore P ( X i π ( X i )) is

Where

just P(Xi).
Once completed, a Bayesian network can be used to derive
the posterior probability distribution of one or more
variables since we have observed the particular values for
other variables in the network, or to update previous
conclusions when new evidence reach the system.
The first important Bayesian network-based IR model was
the inference network model, designed by Turtle and Croft
[11]. It is composed, of two networks: the collection network
and the query network. The former is composed of two types
of nodes which represent documents and terms (concepts)
symbolizing the index terms contained in the documents. The
latter is built to represent the queries submitted to the system
by means of query nodes and query concept nodes. The
document network is fixed for a given document collection,
and the query network is created each time that a user
formulates a query. Once the probabilities have been
assessed for each node, inference is carried out instantiating
each document node, in turn. Therefore, the probability that
the query is met given that a document has been observed in
the collection is obtained. After all the propagation
processes, the posterior probabilities are sorted in decreasing
order, so the higher the probability the more relevant the
document is [14].
The use of a general Bayesian network methodology as the
basis for an IR system is difficult to tackle. The problem

mainly appears because of the large number of variables
involved and the computational efforts needed to both
determine the relationships between variables and perform
the inference processes. Nevertheless, an increasing effort
has been made in the research of uncertain inference models
for IR. These models consider the following two main
simplifying restrictions in order to solve the above efficiency
problem:
1- Fixed dependence relationships: the structure of the
model, encoding the dependence relationships between
variables, is fixed a priori, without considering any potential
knowledge that might be mined from the collection.
2- Simplified estimation of probabilities: in order to avoid
the large space necessary to store all the probabilities
relevant to the process, it is assumed that those complex
compound events will have been assigned zero probability
values. With this assignment, these events can be discarded
when inference tasks are performed.
Using the restrictions above, the probability of relevance of a
given document only depends on the set of terms used to
formulate the query and it can be computed without truly
performing inference tasks, i.e. without propagating the
evidences through the networks [14].
Based on the first simplification, many models have been
proposed. The main difference between them is in the
number of subnetworks, in the orientation of arcs and in the
modelling of the (in)dependence relation between term's
node. We are briefly going to review some works developed
based on Bayesian networks.
IN the model proposed by [13] two different sets of nodes
can be found : a set containing binary random variables
representing the terms in the glossary from a given collection
(term subnetwork), and a second, corresponding also to
binary random variables, but in this case related to the
documents which belong to the collection (document
subnetwork). The orientation of arcs is as follow : the
document nodes will only receive the arcs from term nodes
and not from other document nodes. The relation between
documents only occurs through the terms included in these
documents.
Based on the fact that structured queries can be more
expressive than their flat (natural language) query
counterparts and that retrieval models that can evaluate
structured queries have more potential to satisfy the user’s
information need, [9] address the problem of probability
estimation in the inference network model and the problem
of expressing structure in queries in a language modeling
system by combining the two frameworks. The combination
uses inference nets to express complex queries and language
models to estimate the probabilities needed to evaluate those
queries.
Many other works have been done in this field such as [2],
[3], [4], [5], [6], [13], [15], [16], [17]. [12] explain briefly
some of these works.

In short, most models use a fixed document subnetwork
structure for a given collection. They do not take into
account the particular dependence relationships between
variables (terms and/or documents) that can be mined from
the document collection. This is not the case for the BNR
model.
The BNR model
In order to reduce these problems, de Campos [14] proposed
a model called the Bayesian Network Retrieval Model. The
objective was to obtain a model able to incorporate the most
important dependence relationships in the collection, by the
use of learning procedure.
The model, consider two sets of variables: Terms (T= {Ti,
i=1,…,M} with M being the number of terms used to index
the collection and documents D = {Dj, j=1,….,N), N being
the total number of documents. The model is composed of
two different layers of nodes: the term and the document
layer. The former is used to incorporate the most important
dependence relationships between the terms into the
collection. Term to term dependences is represented by
means of a polytree.
The relationship between a document and each of the terms
by which it has been indexed is presented by the links
between the tow layers. The relationships between
documents are only present through the terms that index
them. Thus documents are conditionally independent given
the terms by which they have been indexed.
Fig. 1 shows an example of the final topology of the network

that the parents of a node Ti can have,

p(ti) = 1/M and

p (t i ) = 1- p(ti), with M being the number of

terms in the collection.
Non-root term nodes
For each term node Ti, with parents Π (Ti ) ), we need to
estimate a set of conditional probability distributions

p (Ti π (Ti )) , one for each possible combination of values

The

estimation is based on Jaccard similarity measure.

p (t i π (Ti )) =

n(〈t i , π (Ti )〉
n(〈t i 〉 + n(π (Ti )) − n(〈t i , π (Ti )〉

In this formula,

p(ti π(Ti )) is initially estimated and later

p(ti π(Ti )) is obtained by duality p(ti π(Ti )) = 1- p(ti π(Ti ))
Document nodes
In this case, the probability

p ( Di (π ( Di )) must be

estimated, i.e. the probability of a document node given the
set of its parents (the nodes representing the terms by which
it has been indexed). To estimate the probability matrices
completely a probability functions, is used.

With R

π ( D j ) being the set of terms that are relevant in

π ( Di ) and

∑

Ti ∈D j

the weights w ij have to verify that 0≤wij and

wij ≤1. So the more relevant terms in π ( Di ) , the

greater the probability of relevance of Dj
Inference in the BNR
On the BNR model, the query formulated by the user plays
the role of a new piece of evidence provided to the system.
The last aim is to obtain the probability of relevance of each
document in the collection given a query. The terms from the
query are instantiated to relevant in the network. This
information will be propagated toward the document nodes,
finally obtaining

Fig.1. the Bayesian Network Retrieval Model
Estimating the quantitative information
Once the structure of the network has been created, the
second step is to estimate the strength of the relationships
represented. This process implies estimating a set of
conditional probability distributions.
Root term nodes
Given a root node representing the variable Ti, the marginal
probability of relevance, p(t), and the probability of being
non-relevant, p (t i ) are defined by the mean of

π (Ti ) .

p ( D j Q), ∀D j .

The documents are presented to the user decreasingly sorted
according to their corresponding probabilities of relevance.
To carry out the inference in an acceptable time the inference
algorithm used is composed of two-stage approximate
propagation:
1) Exact propagation in the term layer, obtaining p(ti Q),∀Ti .
Pearl’s exact propagation algorithm is used in order to obtain
the posterior probability of each term node. These
probabilities can be computed in a polynomial time in an
exact way.
2) Evaluation of a probability function in the document
nodes,

computing p(Dj Q),∀Dj

using

the

posterior

probabilities obtained in the previous stage.
Therefore, the computation of
as follows:
mj

p (d j Q) = ∑ wi j .p(t i Q)
i =1

p ( D j Q) can be carried out

III. INTRODUCTION TO THE POSSIBILITY THEORY
Possibility theory treats uncertainty in a qualitative or
quantitative way. Uncertainty in possibility theory is
presented by a pair of dual measure of possibility and
necessity, usually graded on the unit interval called
possibilistic scale [7].
Possibility and necessity measures can take their values on
qualitative ranges or on a numerical scale. This leads to two
different forms of conditioning for qualitative and
quantitative possibility measures, namely Π(A ∧ B) =
Π(A|B) ∗ Π(B) holds taking ∗ as the minimum and the
product respectively. We can then distinguish between
qualitative and quantitative possibility theory. Qualitative
possibility theory can be defined in purely ordinal settings,
while quantitative possibility theory requires the use of
numerical scale. Quantitative possibility theory was
proposed as an approach to the representation of linguistic
imprecision and then as a theory of uncertainty of its own [8]
Formally, a possibility distribution π is a mapping form U
to [0,1]. π (u ) evaluate the possibility that u is the actual
value of some variable to witch π is attached.
π (u ) = 0 means that u is impossible but π (u ) = 1 only
indicates a lack of surprise about u. A proposition A is
evaluated
by
its
degree
of
possibility
Π ( A) = max u∈A π (u ) and its degree of necessity (or
certainty) N(A) = 1 - Π (A) where A is the complement
of A [1].
The importance of the theory of possibility stems from the
fact that much of the information on which human decisions
are based is possibilistic rather than probabilistic in nature.
In particular, the intrinsic fuzziness of natural languageswhich is a logical consequence of the necessity to express
information in a summarized form-is, in the main,
possibilistic in origin. Thus, when our main concern is with
the meaning of information rather than with its measure the
proper framework for information analysis is 'possibilistic'
rather than probabilistic in nature [18]
Possibilistic model for IR
The model proposed by [1] is based on possibilistic directed
networks, where relations between documents query and
term nodes are quantified by possibility and necessity
measures.
From a qualitative point of view, nodes in the graphical
component represent query, index terms and documents and
the graph reflects the (in)dependence relations existing
between nodes.

object to a certain degree. A non-representative term,
denoted by t i , is a term absent from the object. The
proposed network architecture appears on Figure (2).

Fig2. The possibilistic information retrieval model
Evaluation process
In this model, the propagation process is similar to the
probabilistic Bayesian propagation. The query evaluation
consists in the propagation of new evidence through
activated arcs to retrieve relevant documents. The model
should be able to infer propositions like:
 It is plausible to a certain degree that the document is
relevant for the user need, denoted by Π (dj | Q ) .
 It is almost certain (in possibilistic sense) that the
document is relevant to the query, denoted by N(dj | Q).
The first kind of proposition is meant to eliminate irrelevant
documents (weak plausibility). The second answer focuses
attention on what looks very relevant.
Under a possibilistic approach, given the query, we are
interested in retrieving necessarily or at least possibly
relevant documents. Thus, the propagation process evaluates
the following quantities: the degree of possibility and the
degree of necessity:

Π (d j | Q ) =

Π (Q ∧ d j )
Π (Q)

N(dj | Q ) = 1 − Π (d j Q )
Where

Π (d j | Q ) =

Π (Q ∧ d j )

Π (Q)
The possibility of Q is Π(Q) = max(
Π(Q ∧ d j ),Π(Q ∧ d j )
Given the model architecture,

(Π (Q ∧ d j ) is defined by

A document Dj, take its values in the domain {d j , d j } . The
activation of a document node, i.e. Dj = dj (resp { d j } )
means that a document is relevant or not. A query Q takes its
values in the domain {q , q} . The domain of an index term
node Ti, is {t i , t i }. (Ti = ti) means a term ti is present in the
object (document or query) and thus is representative of the

for

θi

θ

being the possible instances of the parent set of Q,

is the instance of Ti in θ .

This is computed for Dj ∈{ d j , d j ) . Note that terms

Ti ∈ T ( D j ) \T(Q) are not involved in this computation.

The top retrieved documents are those having a necessary
relevance value greater than 0, and the set of possibly
relevant documents are retrieved as a second choice.

IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper we have presented tow information retrieval
models: the first, BNR model encode the dependence
relations between terms used to index documents. The
second, PIR represent the relevance of a document to a query
by necessity and possibility measures. PIR take into account
the intrinsic fuzziness of the concept of relevance. However
the dependence relation between terms is ignored. The
hybridization of these models seems to be a good idea to
deal with the fuzzy nature of the information retrieval
process. We are currently studying this hybridization witch
we didn't try out yet. We hope that an adaptation of both the
algorithms used to learn the typologies and the quantitative
knowledge of the network, and the inference technique to a
possibilistic causal network adopted will show an
improvement in the retrieval process.
REFERENCES
[1] BRINI, A.H., BOUGHANEM, DUBOIS, D. A Model for Information
Retrieval based on Possibilistic Networks. Proc of the symposium on String
Processing and Information Retrieval (SPIRE 2005), LNCS, Springer, 271282, 2005.
[2] Schuller, B., Muller, R., Rigoll G., Lang, M., Applying Bayesian Belief
Networks in Approximate String Matching for Robust Keyword-based
Retrieval. IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo, 2004.
[3] Hyun, B., Lee, C., Lee, G., Exploring term dependences in probabilistic
information retrieval model. Information Processing and Management, 39:
505–519, 2003.
[4] Borgelt , C., Kruse, R., Operations and evaluation measures for learning
possibilistic graphical models. Artificial Intelligence, 148, 385–418 2003.
[5] Borgelt, C., Kruse, R., Learning from imprecise data: possibilistic
graphical models. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis, 38, 449–463,
2002.
[6] BLEI, D.M., JORDAN, M., NG, A.Y, Hierarchical Bayesian Models
for Applications in Information Retrieval. BAYESIAN STATISTICS, 7,
25–43, 2003.
[7] Dubois, D., Prade, H., Fuzzy set and possibility theory-based methods
in artificial intelligence. Artificial Intelligence, 148, 1–9, 2003.
[8] Dubois, D., Prade, H., Smets, P., A definition of subjective possibility.
International Journal of Approximate Reasoning 2007.
[9] Metzler, D., Croft, W.B., Combining the language model and inference
network approaches to retrieval. Information Processing and Management,
40, 735–750, 2004.
[10] Salton, G., Wong, A., Yang, C.S., a vector space model for automatic
indexing, ACM, 1975.
[11] Turtle, H., Croft, B., Inference networks for document retrieval. In
Proc. 13th Int. Conf. on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval. 1-24 1990.
[12] de Campos, L. M., Fernandez-Luna, J.M., Huete, J. F., Bayesian
networks and information retrieval: an introduction to the special issue,
Information Processing and Management, 40: 727–733, 2004.
[13] de Campos, L.M., Fernandez, J.M., Huete, J.F., Building Bayesian
Network-Based Information Retrieval Systems, IEEE, 2000.
[14] de Campos, L.M., Fernandez-Luna, J.M., Huete, J.F., the BNR model:
foundations and performance of a Bayesian network-based retrieval model.
International Journal of Approximate Reasoning, 34, 265–285, 2003.
[15] de Cristo, M.A. P., Calado, P. P., da Silveira, M., Silva, I., Muntz, R. ,
Ribeiro-Neto, B., Bayesian belief networks for IR. International Journal of
Approximate Reasoning, 34, 163–179, 2003.

[16] Indrawan, M. T., Srinivasan, B., Wilson, C.C., Redpath, R.,
Optimising Bayesian Belief Networks: A Case Study of Information
Retrieval System. IEEE, 0-7803-4778-1, 1998.
[17] Tsikrika, T., Lalmas, M., Combining evidence for Web retrieval using
the inference network model: an experimental study. Information
Processing and Management, 40, 751–772, 2004.

