GOLDSZMIDT

475

Making life better one large system at a time:
Challenges for UAI research

Moises Goldszmidt
Microsoft Research Silicon Valley
moises@microsoft.com

Abstract
The rapid growth and diversity in service
offerings and the ensuing complexity of information technology ecosystems present numerous management challenges (both operational and strategic). Instrumentation and
measurement technology is, by and large,
keeping pace with this development and
growth. However, the algorithms, tools, and
technology required to transform the data
into relevant information for decision making are not. The claim in this paper (and
the invited talk) is that the line of research
conducted in Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence is very well suited to address the challenges and close this gap. I will support this
claim and discuss open problems using recent examples in diagnosis, model discovery,
and policy optimization on three real life distributed systems.

1

Introduction

It is undeniable that services in the internet are changing the way we travel, access information, invest, bank,
shop, and conduct business and research. These services are supported by an ecosystem of information
technology (IT), including storage, network, and middleware/applications that is growing in complexity.
The complexity is due to scale (over tens of thousands of computers in some cases), because systems
are getting more distributed both in terms of function
and geographical location, and because their ownership is becoming federated even inside an organization. These systems present numerous management
challenges both in terms of day to day operations, and
in terms of strategic and long term planning. Pervasive instrumentation and query capabilities are of
course necessary elements for the solution to these

problems [2, 23, 16]. In fact, there are now many
commercial frameworks on the market for coordinated
monitoring and control of large-systems: tools such as
Hewlett-Packard’s OpenView suite of products, IBM’s
Tivoli, and Microsoft’s MOM, aggregate information
from a variety of source and present it graphically to
operators. Yet, it is widely recognized that the complexity and demands of these deployed systems surpasses the ability of humans to diagnose and respond
to problems rapidly and correctly, and to assess strategic issues such as capacity planning [12, 7, 18]. Indeed,
research on tools, algorithms, and technology for analyzing and interpreting the instrumentation data leading to (automation in) diagnosis, decision making, and
control, has not kept pace with the demand for practical solutions in the field.
This paper (and the invited talk) makes the claim that
UAI researchers are in a very advantageous position to
address the challenges outlined above and advance the
state of the art to close the gap between measurement
and analysis for decision making. Section 2 enumerates the reasons for this claim and also outlines a couple of statistical inference problems that are particular
to this domain and impactful for UAI research.
Section 3 reviews examples in diagnosis, model discovery, and policy optimization on three real-life distributed systems (Subsections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 respectively). These examples are drawn from my own research experience and projects. These projects are at
different levels of maturity in terms of results. Yet, all
of them I believe, open difficult challenges for UAI research and are illustrative of the space. As the projects
relate to my own experience, this paper and the talk
should not be taken as a comprehensive review of recent research in self-managing systems, datamining
of systems logs, or machine learning techniques applied to systems. For that the reader is encouraged
to look at the proceedings of the appropriate venues.
Examples are “The ACM Symposium on Operating

476

GOLDSZMIDT

Systems Principles” (SOSP),1 “The Usenix Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation” (OSDI),2 “The IEEE International Conference
on Autonomic Computing” (ICAC), and the various
workshops including those on Hot Topics, and those
relating machine learning and systems.
Section 4 provides some final thoughts.

2

UAIers to the rescue!

Let me start by enumerating the reasons why I believe
that UAIers are perfect for the job:
1. Given the relative maturity of measurement and
instrumentation tools, as well as data collection
and logging mechanisms, there are large amounts
of data.
2. There is uncertainty coming from noise in the
measurements, unobservable or hidden variables,
missing values, and other factors.
3. To be really effective, the models for any of the
tasks (diagnosis, decision making etc.) need to
combine knowledge engineering and information
coming from pattern recognition, and statistical learning (a definite strength of Bayesian networks [15]). The source of knowledge comes from
the area of distributed systems and from the specific design of the particular systems in operation.
At the same time, because of the complexity mentioned above, there is a need for inducing information from data in order to complement and sometimes verify this knowledge.
4. Models should work equally well in interaction
with humans as well as in automated fashion.
Therefore models should be both interpretable
and susceptible to audits.
5. Some of the fundamental tasks and building
blocks, diagnosis, knowledge discovery and engineering, decision making are core research issues
in UAI.
The UAI reader will undoubtedly spot the obvious
challenges for inducing models and making decisions in
a large scale IT system: large amounts of data, high
dimensionality, etc. These challenges are there, and
they will undoubtedly require ingenious computational
methods for inference. However, I would like to draw
the reader’s attention to two issues that are necessary
building blocks and to the characteristics of this particular domain that introduces new challenges. The first
1
2

www.sosp.org.
www.usenix.org.

issue pertains to hypothesis testing and model selection,3 and the second issue pertains to the diagnosis of
the parameters and structures of the graphical models
we intend to use in this domain.
As part of our focus as a community includes the induction of models from data, our paths cross and intersect with research and applications of statistical inference. As we will see in Section 3, we need for example, to determine whether quantities of interest are
different from one another in a “significant” way. This
will take the form of comparing classification error in
model selection tasks (diagnosis in Subsection 3.1), determining whether two probability distributions are
the same for model discovery (Subsection 3.2), and
in determining whether an action has an effect in the
policy optimization task in Subsection 3.3. Whether
these tests and decisions are embedded and therefore
being taken in an automatic fashion or being taken by
humans, in order to be trusted, we need to provide
guarantees on false positives (and detection rates) or
in terms of log-odds.
In discussing the first issue, I will first concentrate
on a hypothesis testing approach, and then look at
a Bayesian approach. Please note that in spite of the
philosophical and methodological differences, statisticians focused on Bayesian approaches still devote considerable energy and effort on hypothesis testing [5, 6].
As a brief review of “classical” hypothesis testing and
to introduce some useful notation: Consider the case
where we observe data X coming from a distribution
f (x|θ) and that we are interested in testing H0 : θ = θ0
namely, the null hypothesis H0 that the samples where
generated from a distribution with parameter θ0 . The
statistical procedure consists of first choosing a test
statistic T = t(X) where large values of T reflect
evidence against H0 , and second computing the pvalue p = P0 (t(X) ≥ t(x)), rejecting H0 if p is “small
enough”. The objective is to test whether the p-value
warrants the rejection of the null hypothesis; note that
if the p-value does not reach the desired threshold all
we can say is that we “failed to reject” the null hypothesis, but cannot say anything formal about its “true”
state.4 The statistics literature is full of examples of
statistics T and ways to compute p-values for most of
the common cases. There are also variants depending
on whether we want to test equality to θ0 , whether
θ ≥ θ0 , or whether θ lies in some interval close to θ0 .
We won’t go into these variants. The important thing
3
Depending on your leaning towards frequentist or
Bayesian methodology.
4
This is really a simplified version of hypothesis testing
which suffices for the purposes of this paper. The reader
is encouraged to go to the relevant literature for a formal
treatment of this important subject (a good introduction
can be found in [24]).

GOLDSZMIDT
for this paper is that there are two characteristics of
the domain of application that makes the task particularly challenging: First, we must conduct a multiple number of those tests, and second, the number of
samples used in the tests varies greatly from tens to
hundreds of thousands.
The p-value in hypothesis testing provides a basis to
determine the false positive rate of a single test. The
problem when we are conducting m hypothesis testing is that the p-value determines the proportion of
the null hypothesis falsely rejected on the m tests.
Yet, what we really want to know is the number of
falsely rejected hypothesis amongst just the rejected
tests. Thus for example, in subsection 3.2 rejecting
the null hypothesis will mean that two services are
correlated in a single computer. Those are the cases
of interest for us. If in a server there are 10,000 tests,
and we use a p-value of 0.05 as a basis for rejection,
this would mean that we can expect the false positive
rate to be 500. Now, if only 1,000 of those tests reject
the null hypothesis, this would mean that half of those
cases are not correlated whereas we think they are!
This issue has not escaped statisticians; the False Discovery Rate (FDR) approach [3] provides an algorithm
for selecting the appropriate p-value amongst those obtained in the multiple tests to guarantee a given FDR
α (i.e. an acceptable number of falsely rejected H0 in
the number of rejected tests). A search in any of your
favorite engines for FDR will yield a large number of
hits with very recent dates (ranging from 2000 to 2007)
evidence of the importance of this issue in statistical
research. In fact in a recent talk by Brad Efron [11],
FDR is placed as a must directive for statistical research in the 21st century.5 He presents studies in
particle physics and studies with microarrays in modern bioscience as his motivating domains. Yet, the
main characteristics of these domains are very similar
to the ones outlined above. I do think that UAIers
should do well and pick up these techniques and adapt
them to our models and techniques (and I am glad to
realize that this has already started in a paper in this
conference [20]).6
One of the problems with large sample sizes is that we
not only have to worry about whether the differences
are statistically significant (i.e., the test is rejected),
but we should also check whether the size of the effect
is too small. As an example, suppose we are trying
to decide whether the difference between two means
is significant (and to make it simple assume that we
5

The paper is based on his presidential address to the
American Statistical Association.
6
Many thanks to D. Heckerman for sharing a preprint
of this paper. I am not aware of other publications in UAI
on the subject, if there are, my apologies for the omission.

477

know that the distributions have the same variance).
The usual statistic T for the test in this case is the
number of standard deviations that the sample mean
is away from the mean in θ0 . Note that as the number
of samples increases, the value of the standard deviation decreases. This can happen to the point, where
even if the test is rejected, the confidence interval is so
close to zero, that the difference doesn’t really make
practical sense. This problem has also been addressed
by statisticians in various ways, and has a longer history. One of the consequences is that we may have
to select a “more appropriate” p-value (i.e., increase
the number of standard deviations) to make sure that
the test carries practical significance. Of course, this
provides little comfort in our domain, since as stated
above, there is great variability in the number of samples.
Berger and colleagues [4, 6, 5] make other technical
points clear, including an attempt at calibrating the
p-values when there are large number of samples and
the difference between hypothesis testing, the risks of
confusing a p-value with the posterior P (H0 |X), and
on ways of computing that posterior. This is a good
transition to another approach consisting of following a strict Bayesian methodology and transforming
the hypothesis testing into a log-odds test: Letting
M0 and M1 be models for H0 and H1 , in this case
we compare the (log)Rratio between P (X|H0 , M0 , θ0 )
and P (X|H1 , M1 ) = P (X|H1 , M1 , θ)P (θ|M1 ). The
Bayesian approach is very attractive because it offers
semantic clarity, it computes a posterior directly based
on the observed data, and does not, in principle suffer
from the multiple hypothesis testing problem. Yet, it
does present us with some additional challenges: We
now need to specify a model M1 for H1 , namely the
point of comparison to H0 , a parameterization θ, and
priors for θ. This may not be trivial in some cases,
and it may even be restrictive in others. In addition,
we may find ourselves resorting to MCMC simulations
to compute inferences (for example the integral above)
which may be prohibitive for embedded tasks in our
domain. Furthermore, we would also need a threshold for our log-odds decision and as exposed in [5]
for example, this again may difficult and of course,
application dependant. One is tempted to speculate
that a suitable synthesis should emerge. Interestingly
enough, Efron [11] also mentions such a synthesis, and
makes a and explicit and strong connection to empirical Bayes methods in his own approach to the FDR
problem.
The second major issue is that of diagnosis of graphical models themselves. It has been approximately 15
years since Cooper and Herskovits paper [10] on inducing Bayesian networks from data. Yet, in spite

478

GOLDSZMIDT

Figure 1: Time series of the average response time, annotated with instances of the different signatures for the
metrics that present abnormal state. The signatures were
clustered; cluster 3 refers to a recurrent problem identified
by the system operators. Cluster 1 presents symptoms of
high Database CPU utilization and low Application server
utilization. Cluster 2 has memory and disk utilization metrics problems.

of valiant efforts for example [14, 21, 13, 20], we still
don’t have a set of tests, methodology, and software to
test and diagnose over parameters and assumptions,
recipes for remedial actions etc. We haven’t agreed
(or for that matter even discussed in depth) how to
compute the “confidence” on the presence/absence of
an arc or, on viable sensitivity tests for the appropriateness of a specific parameterization on a family in an
induced model. This is particularly important in the
domain of complex IT systems, where conditions may
change drastically because of changes in workloads,
daily regimes, and system configuration, and where
our models that are automatically induced (see for
example Subsection 3.1) are fundamental in enabling
decision making. Basic and fundamental research on
methodology for assessing the quality of induced models and remedial actions is badly needed.

3

Three real systems and three tasks

As explained in the introduction, the following three
subsections briefly describe three projects on real systems. These should be taken as descriptive and illustrative examples and not as set of prescriptive solutions and methodologies.
3.1

Diagnosis of performance problems: SLO
compliance

Transactional systems are very common architectures
in web e-commerce and in distributed database applications (such as desktop help or entitlement services).
A common way to monitor the “health” of these systems is by checking the Average Response Time (ART)
of the transactions. There are many reasons for this:

a) it is a relatively easy metric to monitor given modern servers (just log the entry and exit times of the
transaction, b) it is relatively easy to relate this time
to some business objective of interest, and c) it is again
a relatively easy metric to agree upon when different
parts of the system belong to different organizations
inside the same company (the front and middle tiers
may belong to the IT department and the database
may belong to a business division). Usually, the ART
is part of a Service Level Objective (SLO) which in
turn forms part of the contract between the different
departments offering and receiving the service (sometimes even in the same organization). What is important to us is that a threshold t on the ART is agreed
upon whereby if the ART > t, then the SLO is said to
be violated (sometimes these violations are connected
to penalties under contracts). It is important to be
able to diagnose these violations in order to assign responsibilities, and to identify performance problems,
misconfigurations, and faults. The complete solution
to this problem is still open.
In [8, 9] we provided one possible building block towards this solution. Operators in one transactional
system were also collecting a set of low level metrics
per each server and machine instance pertaining to
cpu, disk, and memory utilization, processes counters
etc. There was a total of approximately 30 metrics
per server. Operators wanted help in trying to determine which metrics were correlated to each particular instance of an SLO violation. By inducing models
correlating SLO violations with the statistics of the
metrics, we were able to induce a signature of each violation in terms of the metrics. Using these signatures
we not only were able to highlight which metrics were
in abnormal states, but we enabled the identification
of recurrent SLO violations, and by using these signatures as indexes we enabled the cataloging of the different types of SLO violations for search and retrieval
of successful repair actions. Once the signature was induced these tasks only required well known clustering
and retrieval algorithms. Figure 1 shows an output of
the graphical interface of the analysis system we built,
which included a “map” of the different clustered signatures overlaid on the time series of the ART. It took
80 pages of email and three weeks for every competent
operators to identify all the instances in cluster 1. Our
procedures did it in a matter of minutes when used as
a forensic tool.
The approach we followed was that of inducing a
Bayesian network classifier that used the low level metrics as features and the state of the SLO as a class
variable. The advantage of using a classifier is that
we had a very convincing metric to judge whether the
model was indeed capturing the relationship between

GOLDSZMIDT
the low level metrics and the SLO violations: classification accuracy. Also, the use of a classifier, as opposed
to a regression model from the metrics to the actual
ART, enabled us to use relatively simple (and robust)
parameterizations for the models. In order to build
the signatures, we use Bayes rule and computed the
log-likelihood of each metric (given its parents and the
class). If the metric contributed to the classification
of the SLO in the violated state, then the metric was
deemed abnormal. The reader is directed to [8, 9] for
details.
In order to increase the accuracy of the models to the
low to mid 90’s we had to resort to the use of ensembles of classifiers, feature selection, and updates on
the parameters to make sure that the classifiers were
able to deal with the workload changes on the system.
Feature selection implied a search over the space of
models where it was really important to compare two
models and determine whether the difference in classification accuracy was significant. The reason was that
signatures may change drastically and appear different even if the underlying cause would be identical.
Equally important was the establishment of a sound
criteria to determine and select the models from the
ensemble that were applicable during different time
periods. These are of course realted to the two main
issues discussed in Section 2, and the definite answers
are still open.
3.2

Model discovery: dependencies between
computers and network services

Facilities such as remote file sharing and email invariably rely and depend on multiple network services ranging from directory services to authentication.
These services are identified (to a first order of approximation) by the protocols used, e.g. SMB, DNS, HTTP,
LDAP etc. Regular management functions such as
determining provenance, planning, detecting change,
and diagnosis rely on knowledge of the dependencies
between the hosts comprising the network and the network services. As the system grows and evolves, it is
difficult to keep track and validate these dependencies.
Thus the automatic discovery and verification of these
dependencies is an important unsolved problem.
In [1] we recently approached the problem of automatically discovering and maintaining a directed graph of
these dependencies, where a node will represent a computer in the network (server, desktop etc.) and an arc
will represent a protocol/service dependency. Figure 2
depicts an example of a fragment of such a graph.
The data used to build that graph is from real network data obtained at Microsoft comprising headers
and partial payloads of around 13 billion packets. The
traces cover almost all the traffic transmitted and re-

479

ceived by around 500 computers on the local network.
The approach in [1] consists of two phases. The
first phase discovers dependencies locally on each
computer/server and then a distributed algorithm
builds the graph using these local dependencies. The
graph(s) can be maintained centrally or locally on each
computer/server. The approach is designed to be distributed, online, and therefore was constrained to only
require the inspection of the packets headers (not the
payload or content). The majority of issues of interest
pertain to the local test.
The first test we devised was based on comparing
two cumulative distributions using a variant of the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test [19]. The main idea is as follows. We abstract the input and output packets grouping them by protocol/service and source/destination
id. Each one of these groupings is called a channel. We
want to find out whether a specific output channel B
(say dns and destination y) depends on input channel
A (say http and source x). To do this we fit a Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of the time between
arrival and departure of the input/output, and then
compare it to the CDF of the time between the same
input channel and a virtual output channel R whose
departure times are uniform and random. If the two
CDFs are different then we declare the channels to be
dependent (their behavior differs from that between
the input and a random output). The initial results
are very promising and certainly enough to improve
the state of the art for the network management tasks
outlined above. Yet, the issues for hypothesis testing
outlined in Section 2 are present and need to be dealt
with. First, each server has on the order of hundreds
inputs and hundreds of outputs. Therefore we must
perform multiple hypothesis tests which leads to the
necessity for some kind of FDR. In addition, the DNS
server contains channels with tens of samples, and also
with hundreds of samples. The HTTP server contains
channels with tens of thousands of samples.
We are currently systematically testing, validating and
comparing our initial approach to a model selection
approach (log-likelihood) based on Bayesian considerations.7 In addition we are also testing and comparing
FDR and an approach based on building more complex models between the inputs and outputs including
Bayesian networks.
Finally, there are many issues with building and maintaining the service dependency graphs, exploring the
changes over time, and learning their normal and abnormal behavior for diagnosis purposes.

7
This Bayesian test was mainly designed by C. Bishop
and J. MacCormick.

LDAP
DNS
KERBEROS LDAP
SMB

prxy-01

480

prxy-04

dubitgspm01

GOLDSZMIDT

HTTP
0.05

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
DNS
SMB
1.001.00

desktop

HTTP
1.00

HTTP

HTTP

HTTP

LDAP
0.74
0.750.76 0.75
0.19
0.38
0.75
0.43
webisaa01
SMB
0.64
0.40
0.76
0.66
0.210.74 0.88

HTTP

HTTP

SMB
0.42
0.49
NBSS

anti-virus2 0.56

0.42

NBSS
HTTP

HTTP

maditgddsa01

Figure 2: Small fragment of a
winserel3

file-srv-01
NBSS
0.52

0.43
0.47
0.47
0.74

file-srv-02

NBSS
HTTP

0.74

built automatically by Constellation depicting the dependencies of
a single computer in an enterprise network. The machine
“desktop” (doubly-circled in the figure) is the root of the
constellation. The other nodes represent servers on which
prxy-05
the root depends (either directly or indirectly), while the
anti-virus1
edges reflect the corresponding
services that cause depenprxy-03
dency.

3.3

DNS

KERBEROS
Netlogon
SMB

SMB

SQL_PROBE

0.33
0.74
0.24
0.19
0.97

0.40 state. If 0.68
in the Healthy
any watchdog reports an error
0.14
for that computerdca01
it is placed
in theDNS
Failure state and
0.09
MOM
0.16
assigned an appropriate
“recovery
action”
from the set
euro-dns-01
LDAP
0.210.970.04
DNS
SMB
0.35
above.
The
choice
of
recovery
action
depends
on
the
RPC
tknsmmom11
recent repair history of the computer and the error
SMB that is reported. We call this choice
DHCP a policy.

KERBEROS
SMB

prxy-08

HTTP

cor p- dc- 03
DNS

NBSS
constellation
NBSS

Policy optimization: keeping the
infrastructure running

Microsoft has developed an in-house infrastructure
for automatic data center management called Autopilot [17]. Its design was primarily motivated by the need
to keep the total cost of a data center, including operational and capital expenses as low as possible. The first
version of Autopilot concentrates on the basic services
needed to keep a data center operational: provisioning
and deployment; monitoring; and the hardware lifecycle including repair and replacement. In this section
we concentrate on the automatic repair services of the
hardware lifecycle. Autopilot supports a simple model
for fault detection and recovery. It was designed to
be as minimal as possible while still keeping a cluster
operational. The unit of failure is defined to be a computer or network switch rather than a process, and the
only available actions for repair are Reboot, ReImage,
Replace, and DoNothing. Faults are detected using a
set of “(active) sensors” called watchdogs. A watchdog
probes one or more computers to test some attribute,
and then reports to a part of the system called the
Device Manager. The Device Manager computes an
error predicate for any computer using the watchdog
attributes: if any watchdog reports Error, the computer is in error; if all watchdogs report either OK or
Warning the computer is not in error. Once a computer is held to be in error, it may be unavailable for
a substantial period. A computer that is functioning
normally is marked by the Device Manager as being

DNS
MOM
There is a logging
service
that records watchdog reDNS
ports,LDAP
Device Manager assigned state, and repair
accrbc6m01-v140
tion. There are many important questions that can be
potentially answered by mining these logs: How reliable are the different watchdogs, and can we estimate
tkmomdb10
and thencorp-dc-02
minimize the false positives
in watchdogs?
Can we capture transient
errors?
Can
we
capture corcorp-dns-01
related faults? Can we evaluate the effectiveness of the
current policy and synthesize an optimal policy? Most
of the procedures and algorithms to provide sound answers to these questions will require progress on the
issues outlined in Section 2. Also, as these data centers contain tens of thousands of computers (and this
number is growing), these algorithms and procedures
need to scale in order to deal with the volume.

Finally, it is enticing to think that as these logs contain
the set of actions taken, plus evidence of their effects,
it may provide a fertile ground for testing algorithms
dealing with causal discovery and modeling [22].

4

Final Remarks

The examples I present above clearly illustrate that
UAI based techniques, methods, and algorithms, can
be useful in automatically discovering correlations and
dependencies in complex networked computer systems,
that ultimately lead to better models and optimal decision making. The expected consequence of this is
that the services we have come to rely upon will work
optimally and uninterrupted.8 At the same time, I
trust that the exposition above makes it clear that
this domain also contains a set of challenges that will
definitely advance the state of the art in UAI. However, my objective with this paper and the talk was
not to present a list of research topics or what I think
are future “must do” for UAI research. Rather, my
intention has been to describe a fertile ground for research and application of UAI based techniques hoping
to entice the imagination of colleagues in the field.

8
It has been my experience in retreats and systems oriented forums that there is sometimes a myopic held belief
that the only usefulness of “statistical learning theory” (as
sometimes machine learning, belief network, and statistical
induction research is grouped) is in automatically detecting
abnormalities.

GOLDSZMIDT

Acknowledgements
Many thanks to research colleagues and collaborators
in [1, 8, 9]. In particular to I. Cohen and J. MacCormick
for numerous discussions on these topics. Thanks to M. Isard for discussions on Autopilot and for the material in
Section 3.3. K. Achan has spent a lot of time with me
mining Autopilot logs.

[13] N. Friedman, M. Goldszmidt, and A. Wyner. On the
application of the boostrap for computing confidence
measures on features of induced Bayesian networks. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 1999.
[14] N. Friedman and D. Koller. Being Bayesian about
network structure. Machine Learning, 50(1–2), 2003.
[15] D. Heckerman, D. Geiger, and M. Chickering. Learning Bayesian networks: The combination of knowledge
and statistical data. Machine Learning, 20, 1995.

References
[1] P. Barham, R. Black, M. Goldszmidt, R. Isaacs,
T. Karagiannis, J. MacCormick, and R. Mortier. Automated discovery of sevice and host dependencies in
networked systems. Technical report, Microsoft Research, 2007.
[2] P. Barham, A. Donnelly, R. Isaacs, and R. Mortier.
Using Magpie for request extraction and workload
modelling. In OSDI ’04: Proceedings of the USENIX
symposium on Operating systems design and implementation, 2004.
[3] Y. Benjamini and Y. Hochberg. Controlling the false
discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach to
multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 57, 1995.
[4] J.
Berger.
Could
Fisher,
Jeffreys
and
Neyman
have
agreed
on
testing?
//www.stat.duke.edu/berger/papers/02-01.html.
[5] J. Berger. Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian
Analysis. Springer, 1985.
[6] J. Berger and T. Sellke. Testing of a point null hypothesis: The irreconciability of significance levels and evidence (with discussion). Journal of American Statistics Association, 82, 1987.
[7] G. Candea, A. Brown, A. Fox, and D. Patterson.
Recovery-oriented computing: building multitier dependability. Computer, 37, 2004.
[8] I. Cohen, M. Goldszmidt, J. Symons, T. Kelly, and
J. Chase. Correlating instrumentation data to system
states: A building block for automated diagnosis and
control. In OSDI ’04: Proceedings of the USENIX
symposium on Operating systems design and implementation, 2004.
[9] I. Cohen, S. Zhang, M. Goldszmidt, J. Symons,
T. Kelly, and A. Fox. Capturing, indexing, clustering,
and retrieving system history. In SOSP ’05: Proceedings of the twentieth ACM symposium on Operating
systems principles, 2005.
[10] G. Cooper and E. Herskovits. A Bayesian method
for the induction of probabilistic models from data.
Machine Learning, 9, 1992.
[11] B.
Efron.
Modern
science
Bayesian-frequentist
controversy.
stat.stanford.edu/brad/papers/NEWModSci 2005.pdf, 2005.

481

and
the
//www-

[12] A. Fox and D. Patterson. Self-repairing computers.
Scientific American, 2003.

[16] R. Huebesch, J. Hellerstein, N. Boon, T. Loo,
S. Shenker, and I. Stoica. Querying the internet with
PIER. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Very Large Databases, 2003.
[17] M. Isard. Autopilot: Automatic data center management. Operating Systems Review, 41(2), 2007.
[18] J. Kephard and D. Chess. The vision of autonomic
computing. Computer, 36, 2003.
[19] D. Knuth. The art of computer programming, Volume
2. Addison Wesley, 1998.
[20] J. Listgarten and D. Heckerman. Determining the
number of non-spurious arcs in a learned DAG model:
Investigation of a Bayesian and a frequentist approach. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2007.
[21] D. Madigan and A. Raftery. Model selection and accounting for model uncertainty in graphical models
using Occam’s window. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 89, 1994.
[22] J. Pearl. Causality: models, reasoning, and inference.
Cambridge University Press, 2000.
[23] R. van Renesse, K. Birman, and W. Vogels. Astrolabe:
A robust and scalable technology for distributed system monitoring, management, and data mining. ACM
Transactions on Computer Systems, 21, 2003.
[24] L. Wasserman. All of Statistics. Springer, 2004.

