426

WEXLER & GEIGER

Importance Sampling via Variational Optimization

Ydo Wexler
Computer Science Dept.
Technion, Haifa 32000, Israel
ywex@cs.technion.ac.il

1

Dan Geiger
Computer Science Dept.
Technion, Haifa 32000, Israel
dang@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract

time, and achieving a good precision requires more resources.

Computing the exact likelihood of data in
large Bayesian networks consisting of thousands of vertices is often a difficult task.
When these models contain many deterministic conditional probability tables and when
the observed values are extremely unlikely
even alternative algorithms such as variational methods and stochastic sampling often
perform poorly. We present a new importance sampling algorithm for Bayesian networks which is based on variational techniques. We use the updates of the importance
function to predict whether the stochastic
sampling converged above or below the true
likelihood, and change the proposal distribution accordingly. The validity of the method
and its contribution to convergence is demonstrated on hard networks of large genetic
linkage analysis tasks.

A problem that remains largly unresolved in sampling
is to compute the likelihood of evidence in large networks with many deterministic conditional probabilities and extremely unlikely evidence. Leading sampling algorithms devised to overcome the problem of
unlikely evidence [2, 28] sometime suffer from low convergence rates when the network contains deterministic probabilities and may not always yield solutions
close to the true likelihood.

Introduction

Stochastic sampling methods in Bayesian networks are
approximation algorithms that generate instantiations
of the network according to the probabilities of a sampling model [2, 12, 13, 16, 17, 23, 28]. Unlike exact
inference which is exponential in the treewidth of the
network, sampling execution time is in general independent of the topology of the network and usually
linear in the size of the network and the number of
samples generated. On the other hand, precision of
the sampling estimate tends to increase with the number of samples generated, but decreases with the size
of the network. Therefore, while in small networks it
may be possible to instantiate almost all the sample
space and quickly converge to exact probabilities, in
very large networks only a small fraction of the total sample space can be explored within a reasonable

In this paper we present a new importance sampling
algorithm for Bayesian networks that is specifically
designed to work well in networks with many deterministic conditional probabilities. The algorithm first
employs known variational techniques [1, 14, 15, 18,
22, 26] in order to approximate the joint probability
when using a simplified network in which some of the
edges of the original network were removed. This is followed by exact inference on the simplified network to
achieve an initial proposal distribution. To refine the
algorithm we add an adaptive scheme that allows the
algorithm to learn a good sampling function and update it accordingly. This adaptation is performed similar to the simulated annealing framework [19]. Then,
we utilize the updates to assess whether the sampling
procedure was under or over estimating the true likelihood and amend the proposal distribution accordingly.
To demonstrate the power of our algorithm we applied
it to large networks with many deterministic probabilities that model genetic linkage analysis problems. We
compare the results with other state-of-the-art sampling algorithms [2, 23] along with an MCMC software specially designed for genetic linkage tasks [24],
and demonstrate a clear improvement in estimation.

2

Background

We start with a brief overview of the importance sampling method and algorithms devised in this frame-

WEXLER & GEIGER
work. We follow the generic importance sampling algorithm for Bayesian networks as given in [2]. Then
we explain the choice of the Kullback-Liebler (KL) divergence as a measure of the quality of the importance function, and proceed with a short survey of
algorithms that dynamically update the importance
function.
2.1

Importance sampling and the KL
divergence

Importance sampling (IS) is a powerful technique for
rare event simulation that can be used in the Monte
Carlo method. Assume we have a joint distribution
P (X), in the form of a Bayesian network, over a set
of discrete variables X, and we wishPto compute the
likelihood of evidence P (E = e) = h P (H, E = e)
where E ⊆ X \ H are observed variables and H are
the unobserved ones. The idea behind the IS method
is that certain instances h ∈ H, for which P (h, e) is
large, have more impact on the likelihood estimated
than other instances. Therefore, IS samples with a
biased proposal distribution Q(H), called the importance function, that prefers to sample more ”influential” instances. In order to obtain an unbiased estimator, the simulation outputs are weighted inversely to
Q(H), and the estimate after M samples is given by
P̃ (E = e) =

M
1 X P (hi , e)
M i=1 Q(hi )

(1)

where hi is the instantiation of variables H in the ith
sample [13, 16, 23, 25]. First, we note that since P̃ (E =
e) is an unbiased estimator its expected value equals
P (e). In addition, it is easy to show that as M grows
to infinity the estimate converges to the true likelihood
and its variance decreases linearly with M [8].
A fundamental issue in implementing importance sampling is the choice of an importance function Q(H)
that guarantees variance reduction. The convergence
rate of the method critically depends on the variance,
and while a good importance function can lead to significant run-time savings, an inflated variance can lead
to slow convergence. Being an any-time algorithm, the
risk lies in ending the simulation prior to converging
sufficiently close to the true likelihood, yielding incorrect solutions.
The optimal importance function for calculating
P (E = e) via Eq. 1 is Q = P (H|e), as shown in [21].
This distribution is proportional to P (H, e) and when
(h,e)
using it we get zero variance as it yields P
P (h|e) = P (e)
for every sample h. However, one practical requirement of Q(H) is that it should be easy to sample from.
Finding the optimal proposal distribution P (H|e) is as
hard as the original problem of computing P (e). How-

427

ever, as many studies pointed out, using distributions
close to the posterior can still yield a low variance sampling, which in turn leads to precise sampling simulations, and can save computational resources and time.
Several sampling and in particular importance sampling techniques use the Kullback-Liebler divergence
to quantify the closeness of Q(H) to the posterior distribution [5, 9, 21]. The Kullback-Liebler divergence
between the two distributions Q(H) and P (H|E = e)
is given by:
X
Q(h)
.
D(Q(H) || P (H|E = e)) =
Q(h) log
P (h|e)
h

One reason to use the KL divergence as the measure
for accuracy of Q is its close connection to the expected
variance of the samples. We now provide a novel formalization for this known connection. Consider the
weighted power mean Mwr (Z) of a series of real numbers Z = {z1 , . . . , zn } defined for every real r ∈ R
as
 Pn
 [ i=1 wi zir ]1/r if r 6= 0
r
Mw (z1 , . . . , zn ) =
 Qn
wi
if r = 0
i=1 zi
where P
wn1 , . . . , wn are positive real numbers such
that
= 1.
The KL divergence,
i=1 wi
−D(Q(H) || P (H, e)), between Q and the nonnormalized function P (H, E = e) is the logarithm
of the zeroth (r = 0) power mean of the se(h1 ,e) P (h2 ,e)
, Q(h2 ) , . . . weighted by Q(h1 ), Q(h2 ), . . ..
ries PQ(h
1)
On the other hand, the expected variance with respect to P (e) when sampling according to Q equals

2 
2 
2
2
2 P
1 P
2 P
( Q ) − MQ
MQ
( Q ) = MQ
( Q ) − (P (e)) . We
2
0
≤ MQ
also note that the power mean inequality MQ
holds for every normalized distribution Q. Now, for
two importance distributions Q1 and Q2 , for which

the ratios rQ =

2 P
MQ
(Q)
0 (P )
MQ
Q

differ only by a multiplicative

constant c, a small difference in the KL divergence
0 < d = D(Q1 || P ) − D(Q2 || P ), that satisfies d > ln c,
affects the expected variance exponentially since
P
)]
EQ1 [V ar( Q
P
EQ2 [V ar( Q
)]

=

0
rQ1 MQ
1

2

0
rQ2 MQ
2

2

− (P (e))2
2

− (P (e))

=

=

2
MQ
1

2

− (P (e))2

2
MQ
2

2

− (P (e))2

(2)

2

e2d − (P (e))2
e2d
≥ 2

2
2
0
c
rQ2 MQ
− (P (e))
2

0
rQ1 MQ
2

This means that a small improvement in the KL divergence can yield a dramatic drop in variance and thus
improving the accuracy of P̃ (e).
A second reason to use the KL divergence is that this
measure can be easily computed either analytically, for
simple importance functions, or statistically for more
complex ones, as we now show. By taking an average

428

WEXLER & GEIGER

(h,e)
of log PQ(h)
over the samples h, the KL divergence is
derived via:
PM
P (hi )
P (e, h)
i=1 log Q(hi ) M →∞
−→ EQ [log
]
(3)
M
Q(h)

=

X
h

Q(h) log

P (e, h)
= log P (e)−D(Q(H) || P (H|e)).
Q(h)

The mean in Eq. 3 converges fast to its expected value,
because its variance equals

2

2
P
P
2
1
MQ (log Q )
− MQ
(log Q
)
which is of the


P
order of log EQ [V ar( Q
)] .
2.2

Static importance sampling algorithms

The first importance sampling algorithms in Bayesian
networks were logic sampling [16] and likelihood
weighting [13, 23], sampling the network in a topological order using the prior distribution as the importance
function. Since in networks with unlikely evidence, the
prior tend to be significantly different from the posterior, the two algorithms produce large variance and
are inefficient. Backward sampling [12] is an importance sampling algorithm which tries to incorporate
evidence into the importance function by generating
samples in the reverse-topological order. This algorithm sometime suffers from a mismatch between the
importance function and the optimal proposal distribution, and occasionally leads to poor convergence.
Hernadez, Moral & Salmeron [17] suggested an algorithm that incorporates evidence into the importance
function, by using an approximate inference that resembles the bucket elimination algorithm [7] . In this
approximation algorithm, tables in a bucket are not
combined if they are to exceed a limiting size. For
complex networks, where many table combinations remain unaccounted, much information is lost and the
importance function deteriorates.
The evidence pre-propagation importance sampling algorithm (EPIS-BN) [28] employs loopy belief propagation to compute the approximate posterior belief
P (xi |e) for every node Xi in the network. The main
idea behind the algorithm is to replace the optimal
proposal distribution P (H|e) = PP(H,e)
(e) and sample instead using the importance
function
Y
Q(H) =
P (Xi |pa(Xi ), E = e)
(4)
i

where pa(Xi ) is the set of parents variables of Xi in the
network. It uses the marginal distribution to approximate the desired function Q and applies a heuristic
that increases probabilities of very small value. According to the reported results, this algorithm exhibits
the best convergence properties on networks with extremely unlikely evidence. However, as the authors

Figure 1: A small Bayesian network in which the evidence is D = 0. Here the probability P (a, b, c|d) is utterly different from P (a|d)P (b|a, d)P (c|a, d) for some
instantiations like (A=0,B=0,C=0).
point out, when the posterior probabilities change dramatically as a result of the evidence the suggested
importance function may perform poorly. This often
happens when the network contains many deterministic conditional probabilities. For example, in the simple network in Fig. 1 where the evidence is D = 0,
the instance h = {A = 0, B = 0, C = 0} has probability zero. Still, using the probabilities P (x|e) to sample the network will result in sampling the instance h
approximately 6.5% of the times. Other importance
sampling algorithms update the importance function
during simulation, and we discuss this approach in the
following section.
2.3

Adaptive importance sampling
algorithms

The difficulty in setting a close to optimal importance
function Q led to methods that try to estimate the
properties of the optimal function from the samples
already generated. These estimations are used to update the importance function and to close the gap from
the optimal function. In addition, some of these adaptive methods, supported by the assumption that the
simulation becomes more accurate with each update of
the importance function, also monotonically increase
the weight associated with each sample. Denoting by
Qk the importance function after k updates, by wk
the weight associated with samples generated in the
k th iteration, and by Mk the number of samples in the
k th iteration, the estimated likelihood can be written
as follows:
P PMk
P (hi ,y)
k
i=1 wk Qk (hi )
P
P̃ (E = e) =
(5)
k Mk wk

WEXLER & GEIGER
We note that in most cases the adaptive behavior
bias the estimator, namely, the methods can no longer
guarantee that the expected estimate equals P (e).
The algorithm self-importance sampling (SIS) [23] instantiates each node of the network given the states
of the parent nodes in a topological order, and in each
iteration updates the conditional probability tables according to the samples generated in that iteration. The
purpose of this update is to ensure that the proposal
distribution gets gradually closer to the posterior distribution, although no exact measure for this closeness
is given.
The Cross-Entropy (CE) method [4] is another adaptive importance sampling procedure, which was devised for general optimization and rare-event simulation. In the k th iteration the method uses only an
”elite” part Sk of the samples generated at that iteration to update the importance function Qk via the
optimization equation:
X
Qk = argmaxQ
P (h, e) log Q(h)
h∈Sk

This elite part is the top ρ portion of the samples generated in terms of P (h, e), for a user defined ρ ∈ [0, 1].
It is guaranteed that for large enough number of iterations the method will converge to the true probability,
however, this convergence may be slow.
An additional algorithm, adaptive importance sampling (AIS-BN) [2], was devised to sample Bayesian
networks with extreme unlikely evidence and is considered among the fastest converging importance sampling algorithms. The main idea behind the algorithm
is similar to the one behind EPIS-BN, namely to replace the optimal proposal distribution with the function given by Eq. 4. The difference is that AIS-BN
updates the importance function according to rules
based on gradient descent, and in addition, initializes
the probability of parents of evidence nodes to the uniform distribution. We note that in Bayesian networks
with many deterministic conditional probabilities and
evidence almost exclusively in the leaves, such as those
that model genetic linkage problems, the initialization
rules induce almost a uniform importance function, far
from the posterior distribution. In addition, on such
networks the algorithm sometimes converges to importance functions far from the optimum.

3

Variational Sampling

We now consider the problem of setting a useful proposal distribution Q(H) in probabilistic models. First,
we suggest an importance sampling algorithm that employs variational techniques [15, 22] and exact inference procedures on a simplified network. Then, we

429

refine the sampling algorithm and provide an adaptation scheme that aims to reduce the KL divergence
through annealing-like adaptation. Finally, we observe
that intermediate lower bounds on the likelihood are
correlated with the sampling estimates, and use this
observation to further improve importance sampling.
3.1

Setting importance distributions

The use of simplified models that are more amenable to
inference than the original model is the key idea behind
variational techniques. In general, these methods aim
to lower bound the likelihood of evidence P (E = e) by
using Jensen’s inequality:
log P (e) ≥

X
h

Q(h) log

P (h, e)
Q(h)

(6)

where Q(H) is a probability distribution selected by
the variational algorithm. To set a high lower bound
the distribution Q has to be close to the posterior
P (H|e). Hence, the variational approach offers iterative algorithms for finding distributions Q that minimize the KL divergence between Q and the target
distribution P (H|e) and in most cases arrive at a stationary point of the KL divergence [1, 3, 14, 26].
A straight forward usage of this approach is to employ the distribution Q suggested by the variational
algorithms as an importance function. This can be
justified in light of the discussion in Section 2.1, and
in particular Eq. 2, claiming that distributions Q close
to the target distribution P are expected to yield a
low variance sampling. This idea is analogous to the
usage of belief propagation in [28] and that of variational methods in [6]. However, for some class of
networks, especially complex models with many deterministic probability tables and extremely unlikely
evidence, such as those used to model genetic analysis
problems [11, 10], these techniques are not sufficiently
accurate. They either yield distributions far from the
desired posterior distribution [14], or when the form
of Q is less constrained, the time required by these
procedures is not feasible.
We propose a four phases algorithm, called VarIS, that
given a network N sets an importance function Q and
an order of sampling. In the first phase edges are
deleted yielding a simplified network N 0 with a re0
duced treewidth.
according
Q 0 The 0network N factors
0
to P (x) = i P (Xi |pa (Xi )) where pa0 (Xi ) is the set
of parents variables of Xi in N 0 . Then, in the second phase we employ a variational technique that gets
as input the networks N and N 0 after removing evidence nodes from them. The variational procedure
outputs a distribution P 0 (H) that factors according to
the topology of N 0 and approximates the distribution

430

WEXLER & GEIGER

P (H). Note that in this phase the variational proceP
dure reduces Eq. 6 to maximizing h P 0 (h) log PP0(h)
(h)
closer to zero. In the third phase we perform an exact
inference on the simplified network N 0 via bucket elimination [7], using an elimination order of convenience.
We let the importance function Q factor according to:
Y
Q(h) =
Qi (xi |si )
i

where Xi ∈ X and the subset of variables Si ⊆ X
contains all the variables in the ith bucket after eliminating Xi . Suppose that bucket i contains the table
λ(Xi , Si ) before eliminating Xi and the table λ(Si ) after this elimination, then for every instance (xi , si ) we
i ,si )
set Qi (xi |si ) = λ(x
λ(si ) . The sampling order is set to
the reverse elimination order. The fourth phase reinstates edges that were deleted in the first phase. If
the edge U → V was deleted from N and variable U
appears before V in the sampling order, the function
QV accordingP
to which we sample the variable V is
multiplied by pa0 (v) P (v|pa(v)) to take into account
the dependence between U and V that is lost in N 0
without increasing the computational burden of the
algorithm.
Algorithm VarIS is summarized in Alg. 1 using three
external procedures: DelEdges(N) which given a
Bayesian network N outputs a simplified network N 0 ,
VarTech(N, N’), a standard variational technique, that
sets the prior distribution P 0 (H) of N 0 close to P (H),
and FindRevOrder(N) which returns an elimination order of network N in reversed order.
The algorithm’s efficiency in setting a good importance
function depends on the form of the simplified network N 0 . Deleting the edges in phase 2 is done via
the method of Choi & Darwiche [3], but also any other
edge deletion criterion such as that suggested by Xing,
Jordan & Russell [27] is acceptable. The third phase
resembles the method of Hernández et al. [17] in using
inference to incorporate the evidence into the sampling
function. The difference is that we perform exact inference on a simplified network N 0 while Hernández
et al. [17] perform approximate bucket elimination on
the original network N .
3.2

Annealing adaptation scheme

The sampling algorithm presented so far uses a static
importance function. We now present an annealing
like adaptive procedure to update the importance sampling function by learning from the samples generated
during the simulation in order to further reduce the
sampling variance. This approach is similar in nature
to the one used by SIS [23] and AIS-BN [2] with the
difference that here an estimation of the KL divergence
directs the update procedure.

Algorithm 1: VarIS
Input: Bayesian network N with n nodes
X = H ∪ E and tables λQ1 , . . . , λn
n
Output: Distribution Q(H) = i=1 Qi (Hi ) and a
sampling order R
R, D - Arrays of integers;
B - An array of buckets;
Q - An array of multidimensional tables;
First phase: N 0 ←DelEdges(N);
Second phase: P 0 (H) ←VarTech(N\E, N’\E);
Third phase:
R ←FindRevOrder(N);
for i from 1 to n do
DRi ← i
end
Initialization: associate every table
λi = P 0 (Xi |pa0 (Xi )) with the bucket Bj where
j = maxV ∈λi DV
Elimination: for k ← n to 1 do
i ← Rk ;
Let Si be the set of variables aside of Xi in tables
λ1 , . . . , λm in Bi ;
for Si = si do Q
m
λi (xi , si ) = j=1 λj ;
end
if (bucket with observed variable) Xi ∈ E then
set λi (xi , si ) = 0 for instances where xi is
different from the observed value;
end
P
λi (si ) = xi λi (xi , si );
i ,si )
;
Qi (xi |si ) = λiλ(x
i (si )
Add λi (Si ) to the bucket Bj where
j = maxV ∈λi DV
end
Fourth phase:
Let Edel be the set of deleted edges;
for (U, V ) ∈ Edel do
if (U is sampled before V ) DU < DV then
for (V, U, SV ) = (v, u, sV ) do P
QV (v|sV , u) = QV (v|sV ) · pa0 (v) P (v|pa(v))
end
end
end
return Q, R

WEXLER & GEIGER
Dividing the simulation into batches, each of m samples, we update the probabilities in Q based on the
samples in the recent batch. Denote by Dk the KL
divergence in the k th batch. An update occurs if it
yields an improvement in the KL divergence, namely
that Dk − Dk−1 < 0, or otherwise with probability
p = e−kδk
where k is the batch number and δk = Dk − Dk−1 .
Let the variable Xi be sampled in Q conditioned on
the subset of variables Si that appear earlier in the
sampling order, and let Nk (u) be the number of samples in the k th batch where U = u, for a set of variables
U . Then, the update is
Nk (xi , si )
Q0 (xi |si ) = (1 − η(k))Q(xi |si ) + η(k)
Nk (si )
where the mixing rate η(k) changes with time, and
 k/kmax
η
similar to [2], and where
equals η(k) = η0 ηf0
η0 is the initial mixing rate and ηf is the mixing rate
at batch kmax . The values Q0 (xi |si ) are normalized
after the update.
In addition, we associate weights to the samples according to Eq. 5. The weights are initialized close to
zero, and increased reversely proportional to the standard deviation of samples in the iteration.
A particular problem in this adaptive scheme is that
sometimes the KL divergence D(Q || P ) can not be analytically computed within a reasonable time, and even
if Q is of a simple form it can still prolong the simulation to a large extent. We use Eq. 3 to obtain an
approximation of the KL divergence without adding
(h,e)
computations via the average of log PQ(h)
over all m
samples in the batch. In all runs we performed, this
average converged after a few hundreds samples to a
value within 0.5% of the true KL value, and the results show that relying on these estimates yields an
adaptive scheme that benefits the sampling algorithm.
3.3

Directing the importance function

The correlation of the KL divergence and the variance of the sampling estimates P̃ (e) allows the use of
a simple method to assess whether the sampling estimate converges above or below the true likelihood and
to change the sampling function accordingly.
The idea is that if an importance sampling algorithm
for Bayesian networks converges to a value that is below the true likelihood then often it samples mostly
(h,e)
instances h for which PQ(h)
< P (e). The reason for
this phenomenon is that the importance function is
sometimes too uniform, namely, that for most pairs of

431

instances h1 and h2 for which P (h1 , e) − P (h2 , e) =
δ > 0, the difference Q(h1 ) − Q(h2 ) < δ. Consequently, most of the time the simulation samples instances with probability Q(h) higher than the optimal,
(h,e)
< P (e).
yielding PQ(h)
A significant positive correlation between Dk and
P̃k (e), which is the estimate on P (e) when considering
only samples generated in the k th batch, indicates that
the simulation converges to a value below the true likelihood. The reasoning is that at the limit Q reaches
the optimal function and P̃k (e) reaches P (e). Then,
from the correlation one can conclude that the values
P̃k (e) until reaching the limit are smaller than P (e).
The correlation between the last l values Dk and the
corresponding values P̃k (e) is computed after each
batch using Pearson correlation. The KL divergence
(h,e)
as in Secis calculated via the average of log PQ(h)
tion 3.2. When the correlation is significant we change
Q so that high probabilities will get larger, and low
probabilities will get lower. In particular, we replace
every probability q < α in the simplified network N 0
by q 1+β and every probability q > 1−α by q 1−β , where
α < 0.5 and β < 1 are parameters, and normalize Q.
The same reasoning applies when the algorithm converges to a value above the true likelihood, with the
difference that then we expect to find a significant
negative correlation between −D(Q(H) || P (H, e)) and
P̃k (e).

4

Experimental results

We demonstrate the power of the methods suggested
herein by applying them to Bayesian networks that
model difficult genetic linkage analysis problems as described in [11, 10]. The parameters we used in our runs
are m = 1000, η0 = 0.12, ηf = 0.03, α = 0.1, β = 0.2,
l = 10, and the initial weight w0 = 0.001. These parameters were set after training the algorithm on a
few small-size genetic linkage problems that are not
included in the results here.
Genetic linkage analysis takes as input a family pedigree in which some individuals are affected with a genetic disease, along with marker readings from affected
and/or healthy individuals. The output is the likelihood of data as a function of the location of a disease
gene and the given pedigree. Locations yielding maximum or close to maximum likelihood are singled out as
suspect regions for further scrutiny. The exact computation of this likelihood is often too complex and
approximations are needed.
We applied algorithm VarIS to various Bayesian
networks that model real-life genetic linkage prob-

432

WEXLER & GEIGER

lems. We compare the performance of the algorithm
with and without the adaptation features with three
other sampling algorithms: self importance sampling
(SIS) [23], AIS-BN [2], and the software SimWalk2
V2.86 [24] specially designed for the task of genetic
linkage analysis. In order to avoid the problem described in Section 2.1 and illustrated via Fig. 1 that
most samples have zero probability, we improved the
two algorithms SIS and AIS-BN by letting them sample only from the sample space of feasible instances.
This change was achieved without damaging essential
properties of these algorithms. We also note that without this change both algorithms did not sample even
a single instance with a positive probability. The two
modified algorithms are denoted SIS* and AIS-BN*
respectively.
Fig. 2 shows the error in ln-likelihood for every location
of the disease gene when applying the algorithms to
networks that model a complex pedigree with 115 individuals studied by Narkis et al.[20]. We considered 20
different locations for the disease gene, examining the
linkage of this gene with one marker location at a time
(i.e., two-point analysis). Each run generated 100, 000
samples from a network with an average of 800 nodes
and with an average of more than 99.99% zeroes in the
joint probability distribution represented by the network. The exception was the program SimWalk2 that
performed faster and thus executed 1,840,000 sampling
steps. The exact analysis took several days using the
software superlink v1.5 [10] designed for exact genetic linkage analysis. On the average VarIS run 90
times faster than exact analysis on these 20 examples,
taking approximately 120 seconds rather than 3 hours.
To test the added value of the adaptation features described in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 we compared the full
method (VarIS) with two variants: one without the
adaptation described in Section 3.3 (VarIS-A), and the
other also without the annealing adaptation (VarISB). The results on the same pedigree used for Fig. 2
are illustrated in Fig. 3. The line %VarIS in the figure means the error in percentage from the exact lnlikelihood value. For example, at location 4 the error
in ln-likelihood is 1.73 and the true result is −110.1
yielding 1.57% error.
Finally, we applied algorithm VarIS to networks that
model the disease gene at a specific location with an
increasing number of nearby markers using the data
from [20]. We report the standard LOD score for
each set of markers, which is the log ratio between
the likelihood of the data assuming the disease gene is
nearby a marker and the likelihood of the data assuming the disease gene resides on another chromosome.
The run time for computing the exact LOD score with
one marker was approximately 3 hours with super-

Figure 2: The error in ln-likelihood of 4 sampling algorithms when applied to networks that model genetic
analysis of a pedigree studied in [20]. Locations are
ordered in decreasing order of errors by VarIS.

Figure 3: The error in ln-likelihood of 3 variants of
VarIS when applied to networks that model genetic
analysis of a pedigree studied in [20]. Locations are
ordered in decreasing order of errors by VarIS. The
line %VarIS represents error in percentage relative to
the exact ln-likelihood values.
link v1.5, but computing exact LOD scores with two
markers (i.e., three-point analysis) or more is not feasible for this pedigree. In Table 1, we detail the computed LOD scores and the average execution times for
1, 000, 000 samples. The LOD score converges to a
high value around 11.3, supporting the hypothesis that
this is the location of the disease gene, as proposed
in [20]. In addition, the time and space requirements

# Markers

1

2

3

4

5

6

LOD

8.96

10.84

11.49

11.52

11.21

11.35

time

1250

2719

4102

5185

6956

8205

used

Table 1: LOD scores and execution times (in seconds) as
a function of the number of markers examined with the
disease gene.

WEXLER & GEIGER
for this analysis grow roughly linearly with the number
of markers and network size.

Acknowledgments

433

[14] D. Geiger, C. Meek, and Y. Wexler. A variational inference procedure allowing internal structure for overlapping clusters and deterministic constraints. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 27:1–23, 2006.
[15] Z. Ghahramani and M. I. Jordan. Factorial hidden
Markov models. Machine Learning, 29:245–273, 1997.

We thank Reuven Rubinstien for a helpful discussion.
The research is supported by the Israel Science Foundation and the Israeli Science Ministry.

[16] M. Henrion. Propagating uncertainty in bayesian networks by probabilistic logic sampling. In Uncertainty
in Artificial Intelligence, pages 149–164. Elsevier Science, 1986.

References

[17] L. Hernández, S. Moral, and A. Salmerón. A monte
carlo algorithm for probabilistic propagation in belief
networks based on importance sampling and stratified simulation techniques. International Journal of
Approximate Reasoning, 18:53–91, 1998.

[1] C. Bishop and J. Winn. Structured variational distributions in vibes. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. Society for Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
2003.
[2] J. Cheng and M. J. Druzdzel. BN-AIS: An adaptive
importance sampling algorithm for evidential reasoning in large Bayesian networks. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research, 13:155–188, 2000.
[3] A. Choi and A. Darwiche. A variational approach for
approximating bayesian networks by edge deletion. In
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 211–219.
Morgan Kaufmann, 2006.
[4] P. de Boer, D. Kroese, S. Mannor, and R. Rubinstein.
A tutorial on the cross-entropy method. Annals of
Operations Research, 134(1):19–67, 2005.
[5] P. de Boer, V. F. Nicola, and R. Y. Rubinstein. Adaptive importance sampling simulation of queueing networks. In WSC ’00: Proceedings of the 32nd conference on Winter simulation, pages 646–655. Society for
Computer Simulation International, 2000.
[6] N. de Freitas, P. Højen-Sørensen, M. Jordan, and
S. Russell. Variational MCMC. In Uncertainty in
Artificial Intelligence, pages 120–127. Morgan Kaufmann, 2001.
[7] R. Dechter. Bucket elimination: A unifying framework
for probabilistic inference. In Uncertainty in Artificial
Intelligence, pages 211–219. Morgan Kaufmann, 1996.
[8] M. Denny. Introduction to importance sampling in
rare-event simulations. European Journal of Physics,
22(4):403–411, 2001.
[9] R. Douc, A. Guillin, J. Marin, and C. Robert. Convergence of adaptive sampling schemes. Technical
Report 2005-6, Cahiers du CEREMADE, University
Paris Dauphine, 2005.

[18] M. I. Jordan, Z. Ghahramani, T. S. Jaakkola, and
L. K. Saul. An introduction to variational methods
for graphical models. Machine Learning, 37(2):183–
233, 1999.
[19] S. Kirkpatrick, C. Gelatt, and M. Vecchi. Optimization by simulated annealing. Science, 220(4598):671–
680, 1983.
[20] G. Narkis, D. Landau, E. Manor, K. Elbedour,
A. Tzemach, M. Fishelson, D. Geiger, R. Ofir,
R. Carmi, and O. Birk. Homozygosity mapping
of lethal congenital contractural syndrome type 2
(LCCS2) to a 6 cM interval on chromosome 12q13.
American Journal of Medical Genetics, 130(3):272–
276, 2004.
[21] R. Y. Rubinstein. Simulation and the Monte Carlo
Method. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY,
USA, 1981.
[22] L. Saul and M. I. Jordan. Exploiting tractable substructures in intractable networks. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS). MIT
Press, 1996.
[23] R. Shachter and M. Poet. Simulation approaches to
general probabilistic inference on belief networks. In
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 221–231.
North-Holland Publishing Co., 1989.
[24] E. Sobel, J. Papp, and K. Lange. Detection and integration of genotyping errors in statistical genetics.
American Journal of Human Genetics, 70:496–508,
2002.
[25] R. Srinivasan. Importance Sampling. Springer, New
York, NY, USA, 2002.

[10] M. Fishelson and D. Geiger. Exact genetic linkage
computations for general pedigrees. Bioinformatics,
1(1):1–9, 2002.

[26] W. Wiegerinck. Variational approximations between
mean field theory and the junction tree algorithm. In
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. Morgan Kaufmann, 2000.

[11] N. Friedman, D. Geiger, and N. Lotner. Likelihood computations using value abstraction. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 192–200. Morgan Kaufmann, 2000.

[27] E. P. Xing, M. I. Jordan, and S. Russell. A generalized mean field algorithm for variational inference
in exponential families. In Uncertainty in Artificial
Intelligence. Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.

[12] R. Fung and B. Favero. Backward simulation in
bayesian networks. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 227–23. Morgan Kaufmann, 1994.

[28] C. Yuan and M. Druzdzel. An importance sampling
algorithm based on evidence pre-propagation. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 624–63. Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.

[13] R. M. Fung and K.-C. Chang. Weighing and integrating evidence for stochastic simulation in bayesian networks. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages
209–220. North-Holland Publishing Co., 1989.

