CT-NOR: Representing and Reasoning About Events in Continuous
Time

Aleksandr Simma, Moises Goldszmidt, John MacCormick, Paul Barham,
Richard Black, Rebecca Isaacs, Richard Mortier∗
Microsoft Research

Abstract
We present a generative model for representing and reasoning about the relationships among events in continuous time. We
apply the model to the domain of networked and distributed computing environments where we fit the parameters of the
model from timestamp observations, and
then use hypothesis testing to discover dependencies between the events and changes
in behavior for monitoring and diagnosis.
After introducing the model, we present
an EM algorithm for fitting the parameters and then present the hypothesis testing approach for both dependence discovery
and change-point detection. We validate
the approach for both tasks using real data
from a trace of network events at Microsoft
Research Cambridge. Finally, we formalize the relationship between the proposed
model and the noisy-or gate for cases when
time can be discretized.

1

Introduction

The research described in this paper was motivated
by the following real life application in the domain of
networked distributed systems: In a modern enterprise network of scale, dependencies between hosts
and network services are surprisingly complex, typically undocumented, and rarely static. Even though
network management and troubleshooting rely on
this information, automated discovery and monitoring of these dependencies remains an unsolved probJohn is now with Dickinson College, PA. Work done
while a Researcher with Microsoft Research. Alex is with
the University of California, Berkeley, CA. Work done
while an intern with Microsoft Research.
∗

lem. In [2] we described a system called Constellation in which computers on the network cooperate
to make this information available to all users of the
network. Constellation takes a black-box approach
to locally (at each computer/server in the network)
learn explicit dependencies between its services using
little more than the timings of packet transmission
and reception. The black-box approach is necessary
since any more processing of the incoming and outgoing communication packages would imply prohibitive
amounts of overhead on the computer/server. The
local models of dependency can then be recursively
and distributively composed to provide a view of the
global dependencies. In Constellation, computers
on the network cooperate to make this information
available to all users in the network.
Constellation and its application to system wide
tasks such as characterizing a networking site service and hosts dependencies for name resolution, web
browsing, email, printing, reconfiguration planning
and end-user diagnosis are described in [2]. This paper focuses on the probabilistic and statistical building blocks of that system: the probabilistic model
used in the local learning, the EM algorithm used
to fit the parameters of the model, and the statistics
of the hypothesis testing used to determine the local
dependencies. The model, which we call Continuous Time Noisy Or (CT-NOR), takes as input sequences of input events and output events and their
time stamps. It then models the interactions between the input events and output events as Poisson
processes whose intensities are modulated by a (parameterized) function taking into account the distance in time between the input and output events.
Through this function the domain expert is able to
explicitly encode knowledge about the domain. The
paper makes the following contributions:

1. Develops an EM algorithm for fitting all the parameters of this model and an algorithm for dependence discovery and change point detection
based on statistical hypothesis testing.
2. Evaluates the performance of the model and the
inference procedures both on synthetic data and
on real life data taken from a substantial trace
of a large computer network.
3. Formalizes the relationship between CT-NOR
and the noisy-or (NOR) gate [11] when the time
between the events can be discretized.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the model and Section 3 describes the EM
algorithm for fitting the parameters. Section 4 is
concerned with the relation to the NOR gate. The
algorithms and framework for applying the model to
dependency discovery and change point detection is
described in Section 5. That section also contains
validation experiments with synthetic data. Section 6 contains experiments on real data and results.
Finally, Section 7 has some conclusions and future
work.

2

The CT-NOR model

In this section we formally describe the CT-NOR
model with the objective of building the likelihood
equation. First, we provide some background on
Poisson Processes, and then we use them to construct the model (Eq. 4).
A Poisson Process1 can be thought of as random
process, samples from which take the form of a set
of times at which events occurred. A Poisson Process is defined over a mean (base) measure f (t) and
is characterized the property that for any interval
(t1 , t2 ), the number of events that occur in that interval follows
the Poisson distribution with the param´t
eter t12 f (t)dt. Furthermore, the number of events
that occur on two disjoint intervals are independent.

(j)

time of the lth output event and ik the time of
the kth input on channel j. Furthermore, let n
denote the number of output events and n(j) the
number of input events on channel j. Then event
k in input channel j generates a Poisson process
(j)
of output events with the base measure pk (t) =
(j)
w(j) fθ (t − ik ).
The term w(j) represents the average number of output events that we expect each input event on channel j to be responsible for, and fθ (t) is the distribution of the delay between an input and the output
events caused by it, taking as its argument the delay
between the time of the output ol and the time of
(j)
the input ik . The mathematical structure of the
intensity makes intuitive sense: the probability that
a given input event caused a given output event depends on both the expected number of events it generates and the “distance” in time between them.
We recall that given multiple independent Poisson
processes (denoted as P P ) we can use the sum of
their intensities to construct a “global” Poisson proP Pn(j) (j)
pk (t)) as the
cess and write {ol } ∼ P P ( j k=1
probability of the set of n outputs {ol }, 1 ≤ l ≤ n.
The double sum runs over all the channels and over
all input events in the channels. Intuitively, and similar to the NOR gate in graphical models [11], the
independence between the between input channels
translates into a model where the events in the output channel are “caused” by the presence of any (a
disjunction) of input events in the input channels
(with some uncertainty). The formal relation with
NOR is presented in Section 4.
We now proceed to write the likelihood of the data
given
P (j)the(j)model and the input events. Let λ =
w , the total mass of the Poisson base meajn
sure. The number n of outputs is distributed as a
Poisson distribution

n

∼

(1)

P oisson(λ),

2

Let us use “channel” to denote a sequence of events.
The CT-NOR model considers a single output channel and a set of input channels. Let ol denote the
1
This overview is very informal. The more general
and formal measure-theoretic definition can be found in
[5].
2
In the domain of computer networks, a channel refers
to a unidirectional flow of networked packets. Thus a
channel will be identified by the service (e.g., HTTP,
LDAP, etc) and the IP address of the source or destination. In this paper we identified the packets with events
as it is only their time stamp that matters.

and the location of a specific output event ol is distributed with the probability density

ol

∼
=

P Pn(j)
j

k=1

λ
P Pn(j)
j

k=1

(j)

pk (ol )

for l = 1 . . . n

(2)

(j)

w(j) fθ (ol − ik )
λ

(3)

The likelihood of observing a set {ol } of outputs is3 :

L(o|i) = λn · e−λ

n X (j)
(j)
Y
w fθ (ol − i )
k

l=1 jk

λ

(4)

Before concluding this section, we expand a bit on
the function fθ as it is an important part of the
model. This function provides us with the opportunity of encoding domain knowledge regarding the
expected shape of the delay between input and output events. In our experience using CT-NOR to
model an enterprise network we used two specific
instantiations: a mixture of a narrow uniform and
a decaying exponential and a mixture of a uniform
and Gaussian. The uniform distribution captures
the expert knowledge that a lot of the protocols involve a response within a window of time (we call
this co-occurrence). The Gaussian delay distribution extends the intuitions of co-occurrence within
a window to also capture dependencies that can be
relatively far away in time (such as with the printer).
The left tail of the Gaussian corresponding to negative delays is truncated. The exponential distribution captures the intuition that the possibility of
dependency decays as the events are further away in
time (this is true for the HTTP protocol). We will
not explicitly expand these functions in the derivations as they tend to obscure the exposition. Needless to say that the parameters of these functions are
all fitted automatically using EM as described in the
next section.
Groups of channels may have different delay distributions, in which case the delay distribution can be indexed by the channel group and all the derivations in
this paper remain the same. For example, channels
can be grouped by network service, where all HTTP
channels have the same delay distribution (thus allowing data from multiple channels to assist in parameter fitting), but the DNS channels are allowed
a different delay distribution. All the experiments in
the paper use a leak — a pseudo-channel with a single event at the start of the observation period and
a delay distribution that is uniform over the length
of the observations. This leak captures events which
are not explained by the remaining channels.

3

Fitting a CT-NOR model

We perform inference and estimation on the model
through the EM algorithm. We first set the stage
by finding a suitable bounding function B(z) for the
likelihood. The EM algorithm iteratively chooses a
tight bound in the E step and then maximizes the
(j)
bound in the M step. Let zkl be some positive vector
P
(j)
(j)
such that jk zkl = 1 for each l. For a fixed l, zkl
is the probability of the latent state indicating that
packet k on channel j caused output l. Then from
Eq. 4:
log L(o|i) = −λ +

n
X

X

w(j) fθ (ol − ik )

log

X

zkl

l=1

= −λ +

n
X

jk

l=1

= −λ +

n
X

(j)

log

(j) w

Since the Poisson Process produces unordered outputs but the events are considered to be sorted, a permutation factor of n! is required. It cancels out the n! in
the Poisson density.

(j)

fθ (ol − ik )
(j)

zkl

jk

log Ez

(j)

w(j) fθ (ol − ik )
(j)

zkl

l=1

Now, by Jensen’s inequality, log L(o|i) ≥ B(z)
where:
(j)

B(z) = −λ +

X

Ez log

w(j) fθ (ol − ik )
(j)

zkl

l

3.1

E-Step

For a particular choice of θ (the parameters of the fθ
function) and w(j) , the bound above is tight when
(j)

(j)

zkl = P

w(j) fθ (ol − ik )
(j ′ )

j ′ k′

because in that case,

w(j ′ ) fθ (ol − ik′ )
(j)

w (j) fθ (ol −ik )

is a constant for

(j)
zkl

a fixed l and E log C = log EC = log C. Therefore,
(j)
we use these choice of zkl .
3.2

M-step
(j)

For a fixed choice of zkl , we need to maximize the
bound with respect to w(j) and θ.
Optimizing with respect to w(j) , we notice that the
derivative is
X X (j) 1
∂B
(j)
=
−n
+
zkl (j)
∂w(j)
w
l

3

(j)

yielding

ŵ

(j)

=

(j)
kl zkl
n(j)

P

k

With respect to θ, we can say that
X (j)
(j)
zkl log fθ (ol − ik )
θ̂ = arg max
θ

jkl

which is simply the parts of the objective function
that depend on θ. This can be a very easy optimization problem for a large class of distributions,
as it is of the same form as maximum likelihood parameter observation given observed data points and
corresponding counts. For example, for the exponential family, this simply requires moment matching: µ(θ̂) =

P

(j)

jkl

(j)

zkl T (ol −ik )
P
(j)
jkl zkl

where µ(θ̂) is the mean

parameterization of the estimated parameter θ̂ and
T (·) are the sufficient statistics for the family.

4

Relation to Noisy Or

As an alternative model, consider binning the observed data into windows of width δ and modeling
the presence or absence of output events in a particular bin as a NOR [11]. The possible explanations
(parents) are the presence of input events in preceding windows. We will show that a particular, natural
parameterization of the NOR model is equivalent to
CT-NOR in the limit, as the bin width approaches
zero. This relationship is important because it provides a nontrivial extension of NOR to domains with
continuous time and provides insight into the independence structure of the two models.
Let Oδt be an indicator of presence of output events
(j)δ
between the times tδ and tδ + δ and It be the indicator for input events from channel j in that same
time period. We will use PNOR to denote the probability under the NOR model and PCT-NOR for probability under CT-NOR.

of distributions, this parameterization imposes only
minor constraints on the weights, but will be useful
for reasoning about NOR models which model the
same data but with differing bin widths. When the
bin width is halved, the probability that one of the
sub-bins has an output event must be equal to the
probability that the large bin has an output event
plus a second-order term. This condition is required
for a coherent parameterization of a family of NOR
distributions and follows from the technical conditions placed on fθ .
We argue that as the bin width δ decreases, this
model becomes equivalent to a CT-NOR with a suitable choice of parameters. Choose a δ sufficiently
small that each bin contains at most one input event
per channel, and at most one output event. We will
t
use PNOR
to denote PNOR (Oδt = 0|Input), the probability that the tth bin has no output events falling
into it.

t
PNOR

=


YY
1 − w(j) fθ ((t − s)δ)I(j)δ
s
j s<t

=

YY
j

=

k

1−δ


(j)
1 − w(j) fθ (tδ − ik )δ + o(δ 2 )

XX
j

k

Under a CT-NOR model which uses the same w(j)
and the same fθ , the probability of not observing
any outputs is very similar. We use π to denote the
parameter of the Poisson random variable governing
the number of outputs in the interval.

π

=

XX
j

PNOR (Oδt

= 0|Input) =

YY

(1 −

(j)
)
p(t−s) I(j)δ
s

= δ

j s<t

(j)

The p(t−s) is the weight associated with the possible
(j)δ

explanation Is . To prevent the number of parameters from increasing as the bin size becomes small,
reparameterize with
(j)

p(t−s) = w(j) fθ (δ(t − s))δ
for any distribution fθ that satisfies some technical
conditions.4 Since fθ may be a very flexible family
4

It is sufficient for the density to exist and be Lips-


(j)
w(j) fθ (tδ − ik ) + o(δ 2 )

ˆ

tδ+δ

tδ

k

XX
j

t
PCT-NOR

w(j)
w

(j)

(j)

fθ (x − ik )dx
(j)

fθ (tδ − ik ) + o(δ 2 )

k

= P [Poisson(π) = 0]
= exp(−π)
= 1 − π + o(δ 2 )
t
= PNOR
+ o(δ 2 )

chitz, which means that there exists a constant C such
that |fθ (a) − fθ (b)| ≤ C|a − b| for any a, b. Any continuously differentiable function with a bounded derivative
satisfies this condition. It is easy to extend this proof to
any bounded density with a finite number of discontinuities which has a bounded derivative everywhere except
for the discontinuities.

These results can be combined to demonstrate that
the probability assigned to any set of output events
by the two models is equal up a factor of (1 + o(nδ))
which converges to 1 as δ decreases to zero. The
asymptotics are in terms of bin width δ decreasing
to zero for a fixed set of observations, so n and T are
constant.

PNOR (Out|In)
PCT-NOR (Out|In)
1−Oδt 
Oδt
T /δ 
t
t
Y
1 − PNOR
PNOR
=
t
t
PCT-NOR
1 − PCT-NOR
t=0
= (1 + o(δ 2 ))T /δ−n · (1 + o(δ))n

= (1 + (T /δ − n)o(δ 2 )) · (1 + no(δ))
= (1 + (T + n)o(δ))
= (1 + o(δ))
CT-NOR and NOR with an increasingly small bin
size assign equivalent probability to any sequence
of output events, indicating that the two classes of
models are closely related, and that CT-NOR is the
model that emerges as the limit when the NOR’s bin
size is decreased toward zero.

5

Dependence discovery and change
point detection

With the probabilistic framework described in the
previous section, we can use statistical machinery
to perform inference for two applications: a) inputoutput relation discovery and b) change-point detection. The next two subsections describe the algorithms in detail and also validate the main assumptions using synthetically generated data. The final
subsection (5.3) describes a computationally efficient
approximation to the hypothesis test procedures.
5.1

Dependence discovery

For the purposes of network management, a crucial
problem is dependence discovery. For each computer
in the network, we are interested in automatically
finding out from observations which input channels
have a causal effect on an output channel.
We can frame the dependency discovery task as hypothesis testing. Specifically, testing whether an input channel j causes output events corresponds to
testing the hypothesis that w(j) = 0. One way of
testing this hypothesis is through the likelihood ratio test [14]. We fit two models: Mfull , under which,

all the parameters are unrestricted, and Mres , under which w(j) is constrained to be zero. The test
statistic in this case is
−2 log Λ = −2 log

LMres (Data)
LMfull (Data)

The asymptotic distribution of this test statistic is
called a χ̄2 and is a mixture of χ2 with different degrees of freedom. The weights depend on the Fisher
information matrix and are difficult to compute[7],
but the significant terms in the mixture are χ21 and
χ20 which is a delta function at zero. The χ̄2 emerges
as the null distribution instead of the more familiar χ2 because the weight parameters w(·) are constrained to be non-negative, and when an estimated
ŵ(j) is zero in the unconstrained model, imposing
the constraint does not change the likelihood. If a
set of true null hypotheses is known, the mixture coefficients can be trivially estimated, with the weight
of χ20 being the proportion of test statistics that are
0. When no ground truth is available, the proportion of null hypotheses can be estimated using the
method described in [13] and then used to estimate
the mixture proportions.
To demonstrate that the model efficiently recovers
the true causal channels and has the proper teststatistic distribution under the null hypothesis, we
first test the model on synthetic data that is generated according to some instantiation of the model.
10 input channels are generated; half of them have
no causal impact on output events and half produce
a Poisson(0.01) number of output events with the delay distribution of Exponential(0.1). Note that the
causality is weak – very few input events actively
produce an output. For each hour, 500 input events
per channel, the corresponding output events, and
100 uniformly random noise events (which are not
caused by any input activity) are produced. The
resulting p-values are plotted in Figure 1.
Observe that the null p-values (conditioned on the
test statistic being non-zero) are distributed uniformly. This is evidenced by the p-values following
the diagonal on the quantile-quantile plot. The alternative p-values (without any conditioning) for channels which exhibit causality are mostly very low, with
88% being below 0.1. Furthermore, the specific parameter estimates (the delay distribution parameter
and w(j) ) are in line with their true values.
5.2

Changepoint Detection

When the relationship between events is altered, it
can be an indication of a significant change in the

1.0

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

P−Values

0.6

0.8

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

P−Values

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

Uniform

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Uniform

Figure 1: Quantile-quantile plot of dependency discovery p-values for 2 hours of synthetic data. The
red circles are the distribution of p-values for the
null hypotheses, and are uniform. The blue triangles show p-values of the alternative hypotheses and
are small, indicating power.

Figure 2: Quantile-quantile plot of the p-values for
changepoint detection on synthetic data. The red
circles are null hypotheses (no changepoint), the
green diamonds are a weak alternative (w(j) increases from 0.01 to 0.02) and the blue triangles are a
strong alternative (w(j) increases from 0.01 to 0.05).

system; in the case of Constellation, this is of interest to the system administrators. We describe
a building block for identifying whether the parameters w(j) change between two time periods and
demonstrate its correct functionality. Changepoint
algorithms have long been studied in machine learning and statistics, and our test for whether the behavior of a parameter is altered between two time
periods can be plugged into one of many existing algorithms. Furthermore, the simple two-period test
described here is sufficient for many monitoring applications.

the weight changes:

We again use the log-likelihood ratio test methodology. In order to do that, it is necessary to extend the
model to allow the parameters to depend on time.
The model can be written as


X X (j)
(j)
{o} ∼ P P 
w (j) fθ (ol − ik ) .
j

k

ik

Detecting changepoints is accomplished by testing
two hypotheses. The null is that the weights do not
change between two time periods, and can be written
(j)
as wt = w(j) . Under the alternative, for a particular channel of interest m and an interval of time S,

∀j 6= m

(j)

wt

(m)

wt

= w(j)
= w(m) if t ∈ S, w′(m) otherwise.

The existence of a changepoint is equivalent to rejecting the null hypothesis. Fitting the alternative
model is a simple modification of the EM procedure
described for the null model; for fast performance, it
is possible to initialize at the null model’s parameter
values and take a single M step, reusing the latent
variable distribution estimated in the E step. The
test statistic in this case will again be −2 log Λ and
its null distribution will be χ2 if the true w(m) > 0
and χ̄2 otherwise.
Figure 2 shows a quantile-quantile plot of the pvalues (computed using the χ2 distribution) under
the null hypothesis, computed for causal channels of
the same synthetic data as in section 5.1; there are
two hours of data with 500 input events per channel per hour. As expected, the quantile-quantile plot
forms a straight line, demonstrating that on the synthetic dataset, the null test statistic has a χ2 distribution. When a strong changepoint is observed (w(j)
changes from 0.01 to 0.05) , the p-values are very low.
When a weak changepoint is observed (w(j) changes

from 0.01 to 0.02) the p-values are lower than under
the null distribution but power is significantly lower
than when detecting the major changepoint.

ROC for HTTP
1

5.3

Bounding the log-likelihood ratio

Computing the log-likelihood ratio requires refitting
a restricted model, though only a small number of
EM steps is typically required. However, it is possible to bound the log likelihood ratio for dependency
discovery very efficiently.

True Positive Rate

0.9

0.8

0.7

NoisyOR with bounds
NoisyOR with exact computations
Unamb. coocc.
Std. coocc.

0.6

0.5
0

For the restricted model testing channel m’s causality, we must compute the likelihood under the constraint that w(m) = 0. Take the estimates of w of the
λ
unrestricted model and let α = λ−w(m)
. Instead
n(m)
of computing the ratio with the true maximum likelihood parameters for the restricted model, we propose a set of restricted parameters, and compute the
ratio using them. We produce a restricted version of
parameters w(·) by setting w(m) to zero and inflating
the rest by a factor of α. That simply corresponds
to imposing the restriction, and redistributing the
weight among the rest of the parameters, so that
the expected number of output packets remains the
same. In that case,

LMres (Data)
LMf ull (Data)
P
Y j6=m,k αw(j) fθ (ol − i(j)
k )
≥ −2 log
P
(j)
(j)
fθ (ol − ik )
l
jk w
!
P
(m)
(m)
Y
fθ (ol − ik )
kw
= −2 log
α 1− P
(j) f (o − i(j) )
θ l
l
jk w
k
!
Y
X (j)
= −2 log
α 1−
zml

−2 log Λ = −2 log

l

k

j
As a reminder, zml
is the latent variable distribution
estimated in the E-step of EM. Since the numerator
of the log-likelihood ratio is a lower bound and the
denominator exact, this expression
is a lower bound
P (j) 
Q 
on Λ. Intuitively, log l 1 − k zml corresponds
to the probability that channel m has exactly 0 output events assigned to it when causality is assigned
according to the EM distribution on the latent variables . The log α term corresponds to the increase
in likelihood from redistributing channel m’s weight
among the other channels.

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

FDR

Figure 3: ROC for CT-NOR and competing algorithms on data from a real enterprise network. Both
the exact an approximate CT-NOR tests produce detection results superior to the alternative methods.

6

Results

We describe the results of applying the algorithms
of the previous section to a subset of a real dataset
consisting of a trace comprising headers and partial
payload of around 13 billions packets collected over
a 3.5 week period in 2005 at Microsoft Research in
Cambridge, England. This site contains about 500
networked machines and the trace captures conversations over 2800 off-site IP addresses. Ground-truth
for dependence discovery and change point detection
is not readily available and it has to be manually generated. We took 24 hours of data at the web proxy
and manually extracted ground truth for the HTTP
traffic at this server by deep inspection of HTTP
packets. It is with this part of the data that we validate our algorithms, as it provides us with objective
metrics, such as precision and recall, to assess the
performance of our algorithms.
6.1

Dependency Discovery

First, we are interested in assessing the performance
of the dependence discovery capabilities of our model
and hypothesis testing algorithm. In the application of diagnosis and monitoring of networked systems it is crucial to maintain a consistent map of all
the server and services inter-dependencies and their
changes. Finding dependencies at the server level is
the main building block used by Constellation [2] in
building this global map. We compare our method
to two other alternatives. One is a simple binomial
test: for each input channel, we count the number of
output packets falling within a W width window of

6.2

Changepoint Detection

Since the true presence or absence of a changepoint
is unknown, we estimate it from the actual packet
causes, obtained through deep inspection of HTTP
packets. We collect a set of input and output channel pairs for which there is no evidence of change.
We regard these as coming from the null hypothesis.
A set of pairs for which the ground truth provides
strong evidence of a change are collected, and considered to be from the alternative hypothesis.
We apply our changepoint test to that population,
and report the results in Figure 4. The CT-NOR
changepoint detection algorithm produces uniformly
distributed p-values for channels which come from
the null hypothesis and do not exhibit a changepoint,
confirming that our null hypothesis distribution is
calibrated. On the other hand, the test on alterna5
As sometimes an input package generates more than
one output packet, we enabled our model to account for
this by allowing “autocorrelations” to take place. Namely
a packet in an output channel can depend on an input
channel or on the (time-wise) preceding output packet.

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

As can be seen on the ROC curve in Figure 3,
CT-NOR successfully captures 85% of the true correlations with a 1% false positive rate. In total, the
model detects 95% of the true correlations at 10%
of false positives. We want to additionally point
out that some of correlations present are very subtle; 13% of the correlations are evidenced by a single output packet. We also point out that CT-NOR
performs significantly better than both alternatives
based on co-occurrence of input packets, providing
even more conclusive evidence that CT-NOR is capturing nontrivial dependencies. The approximation
error from using the bound of section 5.3 is minimal,
while the computation savings are significant. On a
relatively slow laptop, the bounds on log-likelihood
ratio test for a hour of traffic on a busy HTTP proxy
can be computed in 7 seconds; exact computations
take 86 seconds.

P−Values

an input packet, and determine whether that number is significantly higher than if the output packets
were uniformly distributed. We call this “standard
co-occurrence.” The second alternative considers an
input and output channel to be dependent only if
there is a unique input packet in the immediate vicinity of an output packet. The reason we select these
two alternatives is that a) they reflect (by and large)
current heuristics used in the systems community [1]
and b) they will capture essentially the “easy” dependencies (as our results indicate).5

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Uniform

Figure 4: Quantile-Quantile plot of changepoint pvalues. The red circles are channel pairs which, according to the ground truth, not exhibit a changepoint. The blue triangles represent channel pairs exhibiting change according to the ground truth.
tive hypothesis channels produces a large proportion
of very small p-values, indicating confidence that a
changepoint occurred.

7

Conclusions and Future Work

We presented a generative model based on Poisson
processes called CT-NOR, to model the relationship
between events based on the time of their occurrences. The model is induced from data only containing information about the time stamps for the
events. This capability is crucial in the domain of
networked systems as collecting any other type of information would entail prohibitive amounts of overhead. Specific domain knowledge about the expected
shape of the distribution of the time delay between
events can be incorporated to the model using a parameterized function. The EM algorithm used to fit
the parameters of the model given the data also induces the parameters of this function. The combination of knowledge engineering and learning from data
is clearly exemplified in the application we presented
to the domain of computer systems, where we used
a mixture model consisting of an exponential and a
uniform distribution.
In terms of applying the model we focused on providing building blocks for diagnosis and monitoring.

We provided algorithms based on statistical hypothesis testing for (a) discovering the dependencies between input and output channels in computer networks, and for (b) finding changes in expected behavior (change-point detection). We validated these
algorithms first on synthetic data, and then on a
subset (HTTP traffic) of a trace of real data from
events in a corporate communication network containing 500 computers and servers.
The relationship presented in Section 4 between
CT-NOR and the NOR gate is interesting for multiple reasons. First, as the NOR gate has been extensively studied in this community in modeling and
learning environment and in causal discovery [4], the
immediate benefits are a) increasing the applicability to continuous time, and b) augmenting its modeling capabilities using the time delay functions used
in this work. Second, this correspondence provide
us with another intuition on the independence assumptions behind the Poisson process, as applied to
the characterization of the relationship between the
events in various inputs to the events in a specific
output.
For the particular application of dependency discovery between channels in a computer network we explored a varied set of alternative approaches. They
all failed miserably. Among these, we briefly discuss
two: We cast the problem as one of classification,
and tried a host of Bayesian network classifiers [6].
The idea was to first discretize time into suitable
periods, and then have as features the existence or
absence of events in the input channels and as the
class the existence or absence of events in the output channel. The accuracy was abysmal. The main
problem with this approach is that the communication in these networks is bursty by nature with relatively large periods of quiet time. Once we started to
look at Poisson as the appropriate way to quantify
the distributions in these classifiers the choice of the
Poisson process became clear. We also explored the
use of hypothesis testing comparing the inter-time
between events in the input and output channels to
the inter-time between the input and a fictitious random channel. The accuracy in terms of false positives and true positives was worse than those based
on co-occurrence. The main problem here is that we
are considering pairwise interactions and there are
many confounder in all the other channels.
With regards to related approaches, both the work
on continuous time Bayesian networks [10] and in
general about dynamic Bayesian networks (e.g., [9])
are obviously very different in terms of the parameterization of the models, the assumptions, and the

intended application. The work that is closest to
ours is contained in the paper by Rajaram et al [12]
where they propose a (graphical) model for point
processes in terms of Poisson Networks. The main
difference between their work and ours is the tradeoff between representation capabilities and complexity in inference that the different foci of our respective papers entails. Due to the distributed nature of
our application domain, we concentrate on modeling
the “families” (local parent/child relationship) and
basically assume that we can reconstruct, in a distributed manner based on the local information, the
topology of the network. This enables us to induce
families with large numbers of parents, and with relatively complex interactions as given by the delay
function fθ , while performing inference efficiently. In
the Poisson Networks paper [12], the number of parents of each node are restricted, and the rate function
is parameterized by a generalized linear model. Even
with these (relatively benign) restrictions inference
is non-trivial in terms of finding the structure of the
Bayesian network and indeed this is a contribution of
that paper. Obviously, future work includes merging
both approaches: an immediate benefit would be to
decrease the vulnerability of our approach to spurious causal dependencies due to ignoring the global
structure in the estimation.
There are other three threads that we are currently
investigating for future work. The first one involves
recasting the fitting and inference procedures described in the model in the Bayesian framework. An
advantage of the Bayesian approach will be on the
inclusion of priors. As channels differ greatly on the
number of events this can further increase the accuracy of discovery. A second direction is that of incorporating False Discovery Rates [3] calculations in
order to accurately estimate false positives when we
don’t have ground truth regarding the relationship
between the channels. As we are performing a large
number of hypothesis tests, this becomes a necessity.
In [2] we experimented with the basic approach described in [3], and we verified that the approach is
very conservative in the context of the HTTP and
DNS protocols where we do have ground truth. We
plan to explore less conservative approaches such as
the one described in [13] or adapt the one explored
in [8]. Finally we are in the process of getting suitable data and plan to apply this model to biological networks such as neurons that communicate with
other neurons using spikes in electrical potential.

8

Acknowledgments

We thank T. Graepel for comments on a previous version of this paper. We are also grateful for
the helpful suggestions of the anonymous reviewers
which we hope we have addressed to their satisfaction.

References
[1] V. Bahl, R. Chandra, A. Greenberg, S. Kandula,
D. Maltz, and M. Zhang. Towards highly reliable
enterprise network services via inference of multilevel dependencies. In SIGCOMM’07, Aug. 2007.
[2] P. Barham, R. Black, M. Goldszmidt, R. Isaacs,
J. MacCormick, R. Mortier, and A. Simma. Constellation: automated discovery of service and host
dependencies in networked systems. Technical Report MSR-TR-2008-67, Microsoft Research, 2008.
[3] Y. Benhamini and Y. Hochberg. Controlling the
false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society, 57(2-3):125–133, 1995.
[4] J. Breese and D. Heckerman. Causal independence
for probability assessment and inference in Bayesian
networks. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics, 1996.
[5] R. Durrett. Probability: Theory and Examples.
Duxbury Press, second edition, 1996.
[6] N. Friedman, D. Geiger, and M. Goldszmidt.
Bayesian Network Classifiers. Machine Learning,
29(2-3):131–163, 1997.
[7] B. Lindsay. Mixture Models: Theory, Geometry, and
Applications. Institute of Mathematical Statistics,
Hayward, 1995.
[8] J. Listgarten and D. Heckerman. Determining the
number of non-spurious arcs in a learned DAG
model: Investigation of a Bayesian and a frequentist approach. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
2007.
[9] K. Murphy. Dynamic Bayesian networks: Representation, inference, and learning. Technical report,
UC Berkeley, 2001. PhD Thesis.
[10] U. Nodelman, C. Shelton, and D. Koller. Learning
continuous time Bayesian networks. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Uncertainty in
Artificial Intelligence, 2003.
[11] J. Pearl. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. Morgan
Kaufmann, 1988.
[12] S. Rajaram, T. Graepel, and R. Herbrich. Poissonnetworks: A model for structured point processes.
In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2005.

[13] J. D. Storey. A direct approach to false discovery rates. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:
Series B (Statistical Methodology), 64(3):479–498,
2002.
[14] L. Wasserman. All of Statistics. Springer, 2004.

