A Transformational Characterization of Markov Equivalence for
Directed Acyclic Graphs with Latent Variables

Jiji Zhang
Department of Philosophy
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
jiji@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

gorithm, an efficient search procedure over equivalence
classes of DAGs (Meek 1996, Chickering 2002).

Different directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)
may be Markov equivalent in the sense that
they entail the same conditional independence relations among the observed variables. Chickering (1995) provided a transformational characterization of Markov equivalence for DAGs (with no latent variables),
which is useful in deriving properties shared
by Markov equivalent DAGs, and, with certain generalization, is needed to prove the asymptotic correctness of a search procedure
over Markov equivalence classes, known as
the GES algorithm.

In many situations, however, we need also to consider
DAGs with latent variables. Indeed there are cases
where no DAGs can perfectly explain the observed conditional independence relations unless latent variables
are introduced (see, e.g., Figure 2). But it is often
undesirable to work with latent variable DAG models,
especially with respect to model search. For example,
given a set of observed variables, there are infinitely
many latent variable DAG models to search over. Besides, to fit and score a DAG with latent variables is
usually difficult due to statistical issues such as identifiability. Fortunately, such latent variable DAG models can be represented by ancestral graphical models
(Richardson and Spirtes 2002), in that for any DAG
with latent variables, there is a (maximal) ancestral
graph that captures the exact observable conditional
independence relations as well as some of the causal relations entailed by that DAG. Since ancestral graphs
do not explicitly include latent variables, they are more
amenable to search (Spirtes et al. 1997).

For DAG models with latent variables, maximal ancestral graphs (MAGs) provide a
neat representation that facilitates model
search. However, no transformational characterization — analogous to Chickering’s —
of Markov equivalent MAGs is yet available.
This paper establishes such a characterization for directed MAGs, which we expect will
have similar uses as it does for DAGs.

1

Peter Spirtes
Department of Philosophy
Carnegie Mellon University
Institute for Human and Machine Cognition
University of West Florida
ps7z@andrew.cmu.edu

INTRODUCTION

Markov equivalence between directed acyclic graphs
(DAGs) has been characterized in several ways (e.g.,
Verma and Pearl 1990, Chickering 1995, Andersson et
al. 1997). All of them have been found useful for various purposes. In particular, the transformational characterization provided by Chickering (1995) — that two
Markov equivalent DAGs can be transformed to each
other by a sequence of single edge reversals that preserve Markov equivalence — is useful in deriving properties shared by Markov equivalent DAGs. Moreover,
when generalized, the transformational characterization implies the asymptotic correctness of the GES al-

Markov equivalence for ancestral graphs has been characterized in ways analogous to the one given by Verma
and Pearl (1990) for DAGs (Spirtes and Richardson
1996, Ali et al. 2004). However, no result is yet available that is analogous to Chickering’s transformational
characterization. In this paper we establish one for directed ancestral graphs. Specifically we show that two
directed maximal ancestral graphs are Markov equivalent if and only if one can be transformed to the other
by a sequence of single mark changes — adding or
dropping an arrowhead — that preserve Markov equivalence. This characterization we expect will have similar uses as Chickering’s does for DAGs. In particular,
it is a step towards justifying the application of the
GES algorithm to MAGs, and hence to latent variable
DAG models.
The paper is organized as follows. The remainder of
this section introduces the relevant definitions and no-

tations. We then present the main result in section
2, drawing on some facts proved in Zhang and Spirtes
(2005) and Ali et al. (2005). We conclude the paper in
section 3 with a discussion of the potential application,
limitation and generalization of our result.
1.1

DIRECTED ANCESTRAL GRAPHS

In full generality, an ancestral graph can contain three
kinds of edges: directed edge (→), bi-directed edge
(↔) and undirected edge (−−). In this paper, however, we will confine ourselves to directed ancestral
graphs — which do not contain undirected edges —
until section 3, where we explain why our result does
not hold for general ancestral graphs. The class of
directed ancestral graphs, due to its inclusion of bidirected edges, is suitable for representing observed
conditional independence structures in the presence of
latent confounders (see Figure 2). Without undirected
edges, however, ancestral graphs cannot represent the
presence of latent selection variables.
By a directed mixed graph we denote an arbitrary
graph that can have two kinds of edges: directed and
bi-directed. The two ends of an edge we call marks or
orientations. So the two marks of a bi-directed edge
are both arrowheads (>), while a directed edge has
one arrowhead and one tail (−) as its marks. Sometimes we say an edge is into (or out of) a vertex if
the mark of the edge at the vertex is an arrowhead
(or a tail). The meaning of the standard graph theoretical concepts, such as parent/child, (directed)
path, ancestor/descendant, etc., remains the same
in mixed graphs. Furthermore, if there is a bi-directed
edge between two vertices A and B (A ↔ B), then A
is called a spouse of B and B a spouse of A.
Definition 1 (ancestral). A directed mixed graph is
ancestral if
(a1) there is no directed cycle; and
(a2) for any two vertices A and B, if A is a spouse of
B (i.e., A ↔ B), then A is not an ancestor of B.
Clearly DAGs are a special case of directed ancestral
graphs (with no bi-directed edges). Condition (a1) is
just the familiar one for DAGs. Condition (a2), together with (a1), defines a nice feature of arrowheads
— that is, an arrowhead implies non-ancestorship.
This motivates the term ”ancestral” and induces a natural causal interpretation of ancestral graphs.
Mixed graphs encode conditional independence relations by essentially the same graphical criterion as
the well-known d-separation for DAGs, except that in
mixed graphs colliders can arise in more edge configurations than they do in DAGs. Given a path u in a

mixed graph, a non-endpoint vertex V on u is called a
collider if the two edges incident to V on u are both
into V , otherwise V is called a non-collider.
Definition 2 (m-separation). In a mixed graph,
a path u between vertices A and B is active (mconnecting) relative to a set of vertices Z (A, B ∈
/ Z)
if
i. every non-collider on u is not a member of Z;
ii. every collider on u is an ancestor of some member
of Z.
A and B are said to be m-separated by Z if there is
no active path between A and B relative to Z.
The following property is true of DAGs: if two vertices
are not adjacent, then there is a set of some other
vertices that m-separates (d-separates) the two. This,
however, is not true of directed ancestral graphs in
general. For example, Figure 1(a) is an ancestral graph
that fails this condition: C and D are not adjacent, but
no subset of {A, B} m-separates them.

A

B

A

B

C

D

C

D

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) an ancestral graph that is not maximal;
(b) a maximal ancestral graph
This motivates the following definition:
Definition 3 (maximality). A directed ancestral
graph is said to be maximal if for any two nonadjacent vertices, there is a set of vertices that mseparates them.
It is shown in Richardson and Spirtes (2002) that
every non-maximal ancestral graph can be easily transformed to a unique supergraph that is ancestral and
maximal by adding bi-directed edges. This justifies
considering only those ancestral graphs that are maximal (MAGs). From now on, we focus on directed
maximal ancestral graphs, which we will refer to as
DMAGs. A notion closely related to maximality is
that of inducing path:
Definition 4 (inducing path). In an ancestral
graph, a path u between A and B is called an inducing
path if every non-endpoint vertex on u is a collider
and is an ancestor of either A or B.

For example, in Figure 1(a), the path hC, A, B, Di is
an inducing path between C and D. Richardson and
Spirtes (2002) proved that the presence of an inducing
path is necessary and sufficient for two vertices not to
be m-separated by any set. So, to show that a graph
is maximal, it suffices to demonstrate that there is no
inducing path between any two non-adjacent vertices
in the graph.
Given any DAG with (or without) latent variables,
the conditional independence relations as well as the
causal relations among the observed variables can be
represented by a DMAG that includes only the observed variables. The DMAG is constructed as follows: for every pair of observed variables, Oi and Oj ,
put an edge between them if and only if they are not
d-separated by any set of other observed variables in
the given DAG, and mark an arrowhead at Oi (Oj ) on
the edge if it is not an ancestor of Oj (Oi ) in the given
DAG.
For example, Figure 2(a) is a DAG with latent variables {L1, L2, L3}. Figure 2(b) depicts the DMAG
(G1) resulting from the above construction. The mseparation relations in G1 correspond exactly to the
d-separation relations over {X1, X2, X3, X4, X5} in
Figure 2(a). By contrast, no DAG without extra latent
variables has the exact same d-separation relations.
Furthermore, the orientations in G1 accurately represent the ancestor relationships — which, upon natural
interpretations, are causal relationships — among the
observed variables in 2(a). (This, however, is not the
case with G2.)
X1

X2

1.2

MARKOV EQUIVALENCE

A DMAG represents the set of joint distributions that
satisfy its global Markov property, i.e., the set of distributions of which the conditional independence relations entailed by m-separations in the DMAG hold.
Hence, if two DMAGs share the same m-separation
structures, then they represent the same set of distributions.
Definition 5 (Markov equivalence). Two DMAGs
G1 , G2 (with the same set of vertices) are Markov
equivalent if for any three disjoint sets of vertices
X, Y, Z, X and Y are m-separated by Z in G1 if and
only if X and Y are m-separated by Z in G2 .
Figure 2(c), for example, is a DMAG Markov equivalent to 2(b). It is well known that two DAGs are
Markov equivalent if and only if they have the same
adjacencies and the same unshielded colliders (Verma
and Pearl 1990). (A triple hA, B, Ci is said to be unshielded if A, B are adjacent, B, C are adjacent but
A, C are not adjacent.) The conditions are still necessary for Markov equivalence between DMAGs, but are
not sufficient. For two DMAGs to be equivalent, some
shielded colliders have to be present in both or neither
of the graphs. The next definition is related to this.
Definition 6 (discriminating path). In a DMAG,
a path between X and Y , u = hX, · · · , W, V, Y i, is a
discriminating path for V if
i. u includes at least three edges (i.e., at least four
vertices as specified);

L1

ii. V is adjacent to an endpoint Y on u; and
L2

X3

(a)

X1
X2

X5

L3

X4

X3

iii. X is not adjacent to Y , and every vertex between
X and V is a collider on u and is a parent of Y .

Y

X1
X2

X3

X4

X5

X
X4

X5

(b) G1

(c) G2

Figure 2: (a): A DAG with latent variables; (b): A
DMAG that captures both the conditional independence and causal relations among the observed variables represented by (a); (c): A DMAG that entails
the right conditional independence relations but not
the right causal relations in (a).

W

V

Figure 3: A discriminating path for V : the triple
hW, V, Y i is ”discriminated” to be a collider here.
Discriminating paths behave similarly to unshielded
triples in that if u = hX, · · · , W, V, Y i is discriminating for V , then hW, V, Y i is a (shielded) collider (See
Figure 3) if and only if every set that m-separates X
and Y excludes V ; it is a non-collider if and only if
every set that m-separates X and Y contains V . The

following proposition is proved in Spirtes and Richardson (1996)1 .

(2004) explored the statistical significance of this fact
for fitting bi-directed graphs.

Proposition 1. Two DMAGs over the same set of
vertices are Markov equivalent if and only if

Another feature which will be particularly relevant to
our argument is that between a DMAG and any of its
LEGs, only one kind of difference is possible, namely,
some bi-directed edges in the DMAG are oriented as
directed edges in its LEG. For a simple illustration,
compare the graphs in Figure 4, where H1 is a LEG of
G1, and H2 is a LEG of G2. This feature is important
because it will be the condition for Theorem 1 in 2.3.

(e1) They have the same adjacencies;
(e2) They have the same unshielded colliders;
(e3) If a path u is a discriminating path for a vertex
B in both graphs, then B is a collider on the path
in one graph if and only if it is a collider on the
path in the other.

2

TRANSFORMATION BETWEEN
EQUIVALENT DMAGS

X1

X1
X2

X3

X4

X5

X2

X4

2.1

LOYAL EQUIVALENT GRAPH

Given a MAG G, a mark (or edge) in G is invariant if
it is present in all MAGs Markov equivalent to G. Invariant marks are particularly important for causal inference because data alone usually cannot distinguish
between members of a Markov equivalence class. An
algorithm for detecting all invariant arrowheads in a
MAG is given by Ali et al. (2005), and one for further detecting all invariant tails is presented in Zhang
and Spirtes (2005). The following is a special case of
Corollary 18 in Zhang and Spirtes (2005).
Proposition 2. Given any DMAG G, there exists a
DMAG H Markov equivalent to G such that all bidirected edges in H are invariant, and every directed
edge in G is also in H.
We will call H in Proposition 2 a Loyal Equivalent
Graph (LEG) of G. In general a DMAG could have
multiple LEGs. A distinctive feature of the LEGs
is that they have the fewest bi-directed edges among
Markov equivalent DMAGs2 . Drton and Richardson
1
The conditions are also valid for maximal ancestral
graphs that contain undirected edges.
2
For general MAGs, Corollary 18 in Zhang and Spirtes
(2005) also asserts that the LEGs have the fewest undirected edges as well.

X5

H1

G1

We present the main result of the paper in this section, namely Markov equivalent DMAGs can be transformed to each other by a sequence of single mark
changes that preserve Markov equivalence. We first
describe in section 2.1 two corollaries from Zhang and
Spirtes (2005) and Ali et al. (2005) which our arguments will rely upon. Section 2.2 establishes sufficient
and necessary conditions for a single mark change to
preserve Markov equivalence. The theorems are then
presented in section 2.3.

X3

X1

X1
X2

X3

X2

X3

X4

X5

X4

X5

G2

H2

Figure 4: A LEG of G1 (H1) and a LEG of G2 (H2)
A directed edge in a DMAG is called reversible if
there is another Markov equivalent DMAG in which
the direction of the edge is reversed. To prove Theorem
2 in 2.3, we also need a fact that immediately follows
from Corollary 4.1 in Ali et al. (2005).
Proposition 3. Let A → B be any reversible edge in
a DMAG G. For any vertex C (distinct from A and
B), there is an invariant bi-directed edge between C
and A if and only if there is an invariant bi-directed
edge between C and B.
In particular, if H is a LEG of a DMAG, then A → B
being reversible implies that A and B have the same
spouses, as every bi-directed edge in H is invariant.
2.2

LEGITIMATE MARK CHANGE

Eventually we will show that any two Markov equivalent DMAGs can be connected by a sequence of
equivalence-preserving mark changes. It is thus desirable to give some relatively simple graphical conditions under which a single mark change would preserve
equivalence. Lemma 1 below gives necessary and sufficient conditions under which adding an arrowhead
to a directed edge (i.e., changing the directed edge to
a bi-directed one) preserves Markov equivalence. By
symmetry, they are also the conditions for dropping

an arrowhead from a bi-directed edge while preserving
Markov equivalence.
Lemma 1. Let G be an arbitrary DMAG, and A → B
an arbitrary directed edge in G. Let G 0 be the graph
identical to G except that the edge between A and B
is A ↔ B. (In other words, G 0 is the result of simply
changing A → B into A ↔ B in G.) G 0 is a DMAG
and Markov equivalent to G if and only if
(t1) there is no directed path from A to B other than
A → B in G;
(t2) For any C → A in G, C → B is also in G; and
for any D ↔ A in G, either D → B or D ↔ B is
in G;
(t3) there is no discriminating path for A on which B
is the endpoint adjacent to A in G.
Proof Sketch: 3 We skip the demonstration of necessity because it is relatively easy and will not be used
later. To prove sufficiency, suppose (t1)-(t3) are met,
and we show that they guarantee G 0 is a DMAG and
is Markov equivalent to G. To see that G 0 is ancestral,
note that it only differs from G, an ancestral graph,
regarding the edge between A and B. So the only way
for G 0 to violate the definition of ancestral graph is for
A to be an ancestor of B in G 0 , which contradicts (t1).
To show that G 0 is maximal, we need to show that
there is no inducing path (Definition 4) between any
two non-adjacent vertices. Suppose for contradiction
that there is an inducing path u in G 0 between two nonadjacent vertices, D and E. Then u includes A ↔ B
and A is not an endpoint of u, for otherwise u would
also be an inducing path in G, contradicting the fact
that G is maximal. Also note that D is not a parent
of B, otherwise D is an ancestor of E by definition 4,
which easily leads to a contradiction given that G 0 has
been shown to be ancestral.
Suppose, without loss of generality, that D is the
endpoint closer to A on u than it is to B. Let
u(D, A) = hD = V0 , ..., Vn , Ai be the subpath of u
between D and A. Then some Vi is B’s spouse (in
G), for otherwise we can show by induction (starting
from Vn ) that every Vi , and in particular V0 = D, is a
parent of B, which is a contradiction.
Let Vj be a spouse of B on u(D, A). Replacing
u(Vj , B) on u with Vj ↔ B yields an inducing path
between D and E that does not include A ↔ B,
and hence an inducing path between D and E in G,
a contradiction. So the initial supposition of nonmaximality is false. G 0 is also maximal.
3
The full version of the paper can be found at
www.andrew.cmu.edu/user/jiji/transformation.pdf.

Lastly, we verify that G and G 0 satisfy the conditions
for Markov equivalence in Proposition 1. Obviously
they have the same adjacencies, and share the same
colliders except possibly A. But A will not be a collider in an unshielded triple, for condition (t2) requires
that any vertex that is incident to an edge into A is
also adjacent to B. So the only worry is that a triple
hC, A, Bi might be discriminated by a path, but (t3)
guarantees that there is no such path.
We say a mark change is legitimate when the conditions in Lemma 1 are satisfied. Recall that for DAGs
the basic unit of equivalence-preserving transformation is (covered) edge reversal (Chickering 1995). In
the current paper we treat an edge reversal as simply a
special case of two consecutive mark changes. That is,
a reversal of A → B is simply to first add an arrowhead
at A (to form A ↔ B), and then to drop the arrowhead
at B (to form A ← B). An edge reversal is said to be
legitimate if both of the two consecutive mark changes
are legitimate. Given Lemma 1, it is straightforward
to check the validity of the following conditions for legitimate edge reversal. (We use PaG /SpG to denote
the set of parents/spouses of a vertex in G.)
Lemma 2. Let G be an arbitrary DMAG, and A → B
an arbitrary directed edge in G. The reversal of A → B
is legitimate if and only if PaG (B) = PaG (A) ∪ {A}
and SpG (B) = SpG (A).
When there is no bi-directed edge in G, that is, when
G is a DAG, the condition in Lemma 2 is reduced to
the familiar definition for covered edge, i.e., PaG (B) =
PaG (A) ∪ {A} (Chickering 1995). The condition given
by Drton and Richardson (2004) for an edge in a bidirected graph to be ”orientable” in either direction
(SpG (B) = SpG (A)) can be viewed as another special
case of the above lemma.
2.3

THE MAIN RESULT

We first state two intermediate theorems crucial for the
main result we are heading for. The first one says if the
differences between two Markov equivalent DMAGs G
and G 0 are all of the following sort: a directed edge is
in G while the corresponding edge is bi-directed in G 0 ,
then there is a sequence of legitimate mark changes
that transforms one to the other. The second one says
that if every bi-directed edge in G and every bi-directed
edge in G 0 are invariant, then there is a sequence of
legitimate mark changes (edge reversals) that transforms one to the other. The proofs follow the strategy
of Chickering’s proof for DAGs.
Theorem 1. Let G and G 0 be two Markov equivalent
DMAGs. If the differences between G and G 0 are all
of the following sort: a directed edge is in G while the

corresponding edge is bi-directed in G 0 , then there is
a sequence of legitimate mark changes that transforms
one to the other.
Proof Sketch: We prove that there is a sequence of
transformation from G to G 0 , the reverse of which will
be a transformation from G 0 to G. Specifically we show
that as long as G and G 0 are different, there is always a
legitimate mark change that can eliminate a difference
between them. The theorem then follows from a simple
induction on the number of differences.
Let
Diff = {y| there is a x such that x → y is in G and
x ↔ y is in G 0 }
By the antecedent condition, Diff exhausts all the differences there are between G and G 0 . So the two graphs
are identical if and only if Diff = Ø. We claim that if
Diff is not empty, there is a legitimate mark change
that eliminates a difference. Choose B ∈ Diff such
that no proper ancestor of B in G is in Diff . Let
Diff B = {x|x → B is in G and x ↔ B is in G 0 }
Since B ∈ Diff , Diff B is not empty. Choose A ∈
Diff B such that no proper descendant of A in G is in
Diff B . The claim is that changing A → B to A ↔ B
in G is a legitimate mark change — that is, it satisfies
the conditions stated in Lemma 1.
The verifications of conditions (t1) and (t2) in Lemma
1 take advantage of the specific way by which we
choose A and B. For example, if condition (t1) were
violated, i.e., if there were a directed path d from A to
B other than A → B, then in order for G 0 to be ancestral, d would not be directed in G 0 , which implies that
some edge on d would be bi-directed in G 0 . It is then
easy to derive a contradiction to our choice of A or B
in the first place. The verification of (t2) is similarly
easy (which uses the fact that G and G 0 have the same
unshielded colliders).
To show that (t3) also holds, suppose for contradiction that there is a discriminating path u =
hD, · · · , C, A, Bi for A in G. By Definition 6, C is a
parent of B. It follows that the edge between A and
C is not A → C, for otherwise A → C → B would be
a directed path from A to B, which has been shown
to be absent. Hence the edge between C and A is bidirected, C ↔ A (because C, Definition 6, is a collider
on u). Then the antecedent of the theorem implies
that C ↔ A is also in G 0 . Moreover, the antecedent
implies that every arrowhead in G is also in G 0 , which
entails that in G 0 every vertex between D and A is

still a collider on u. It is then easy to prove by induction that every vertex between D and A on u is also
a parent of B in G 0 (using the fact that G 0 is Markov
equivalent to G), and hence u is also discriminating for
A in G 0 . But A is a collider on u in G 0 but not in G,
which contradicts (e3) in Proposition 1.
Obviously a DMAG and any of its LEGs satisfy the antecedent of Theorem 1, so they can be transformed to
each other by a sequence of legitimate mark changes.
Steps 0-2, in Figure 5, for example, portraits a stepwise transformation from G1 to H1.
Theorem 2. Let G and G 0 be two Markov equivalent
MAGs. If every bi-directed edge in G is invariant and
every bi-directed edge in G 0 is also invariant, then there
is a sequence of legitimate mark changes that transforms one to the other.
Proof Sketch: Without loss of generality, we prove
that there is a transformation from G to G 0 . Let
Diff = {y| there is a x such that x → y is in G and
x ← y is in G 0 }
By the antecedent, Diff exhausts all the differences
there are between G and G 0 . If Diff is not empty,
we can choose an edge A → B by exactly the same
procedure as that in the proof of Theorem 1. The
claim is that reversing A → B is a legitimate edge
reversal (that is, a couple of legitimate mark changes),
i.e., satisfies the conditions in Lemma 2.
The verification is fairly easy. Note that A → B, by
our choice, is a reversible edge in G (for A ← B is
in G 0 , which is Markov equivalent to G). It follows
directly from Proposition 3 (and the assumption about
bi-directed edges in G) that SpG (B) = SpG (A). The
argument for PaG (B) = PaG (A) ∪ {A} is virtually the
same as Chickering’s proof for DAGs (Lemma 2, in
particular, in Chickering 1995).
Note that after an edge reversal, no new bi-directed
edge is introduced, so it is still true of the new graph
that every bi-directed edge is invariant. Hence we can
always identify a legitimate edge reversal to eliminate
a difference in direction as long as the current graph
and G 0 are still different. An induction on the number
of differences between G and G 0 would complete the
argument.
Since a LEG (of any MAG) only contains invariant bidirected edges, two LEGs can always be transformed
to each other via a sequence of legitimate mark changes
according to the above theorem. For example, steps
2-4 in Figure 5 constitute a transformation from H1 (a

LEG of G1) to H2 (a LEG of G2). Note that Chickering’s result for DAGs is a special case of Theorem 2,
where bi-directed edges are absent.

X1

X1
X2

X3

X2

X3

We are ready to prove the main result of this paper.
Theorem 3. Two DMAGs G and G 0 are Markov
equivalent if and only if there exists a sequence of single mark changes in G such that
1. after each mark change, the resulting graph is also
a DMAG and is Markov equivalent to G;
2. after all the mark changes, the resulting graph is
G0.

X4

X5

X4

step 0 (G1)

X1

X1
X2

X3

X4

X5

X2

As a simple illustration, Figure 5 gives the steps in
transforming G1 to G2 according to Theorem 3. That
is, G1 is first transformed to one of its LEGs, H1; H1
is then transformed to H2, a LEG of G2. Lastly, H2
is transformed to G2.
Theorems 1 and 2, as they are currently stated, are
special cases of Theorem 3, but their proofs actually
achieve a little more than they claim. The transformations constructed in the proofs of Theorems 1 and
2 are efficient in the sense that every mark change in
the transformation eliminates a difference between the
current DMAG and the target. So the transformations
consist of as many mark changes as the number of differences at the beginning. By contrast, the transformation constructed in Theorem 3 may take some ”detours”, in that some mark changes in the way actually
increase rather than decrease the difference between G
and G 0 . (This is not the case in Figure 5, but if, for
example, we chose different LEGs for G1 or G2, there
would be detours.) We believe that no such detour is
really necessary, that is, there is always a transformation from G to G 0 consisting of as many mark changes
as the number of differences between them. But we
are yet unable to prove this conjecture.

X3

X4

X5

step 3

step 2 (H1)
X1

Proof: The ”if” part is trivial – since every mark
change preserves the equivalence, the end is of course
Markov equivalent to the beginning. Now suppose G
and G 0 are equivalent. We show that there exists such
a sequence of transformation. By Proposition 2, there
is a LEG H for G and a LEG H0 for G 0 . By Theorem 1, there is a sequence of legitimate mark changes
s1 that transforms G to H, and there is a sequence of
legitimate mark changes s3 that transforms H0 to G 0 .
By Theorem 2, there is a sequence of legitimate mark
changes s2 that transforms H to H0 . Concatenating s1 ,
s2 and s3 yields a sequence of legitimate mark changes
that transforms G to G 0 .

X5

step 1

X1

X2

X3

X2

X3

X4

X5

X4

X5

step 4 (H2)

step 5 (G2)

Figure 5: A transformation from G1 to G2

3

Conclusion

In this paper we established a transformational property for Markov equivalent directed MAGs, which is
a generalization of the transformational characterization of Markov equivalent DAGs given by Chickering
(1995). It implies that no matter how different two
Markov equivalent graphs are, there is a sequence of
Markov equivalent graphs in between such that the
adjacent graphs differ in only one edge. It could thus
simplify derivations of invariance properties across a
Markov equivalence class — in order to show two arbitrary Markov equivalent DMAGs share something in
common, we only need to consider two Markov equivalent DMAGs with the minimal difference. Indeed,
Chickering (1995) used his characterization to derive
that Markov equivalent DAGs have the same number
of parameters under the standard CPT parameterization (and hence would receive the same score under the
typical penalized-likelihood type metrics). The discrete parameterization of DMAGs is currently under
development4 . We think our result will prove useful to
show similar facts once the discrete parameterization
is available.
4

Drton and Richardson (2005) provide a parameterization for bi-directed graphs with binary variables, for which
the problem of parameter equivalence does not arise because no two different bi-directed graphs are Markov equivalent.

The property, however, does not hold exactly for general MAGs, which may also contain undirected edges5 .
A simple counterexample is given in Figure 6. When
we include undirected edges, the requirement of ancestral graphs is that the endpoints of undirected edges
are of zero in-degree — that is, if a vertex is an endpoint of an undirected edge, then no edge is into that
vertex (see Richardson and Spirtes (2002) for details).
So, although the two graphs in Figure 6 are Markov
equivalent MAGs, M1 cannot be transformed to M2
by a sequence of single legitimate mark changes, as
adding any single arrowhead to M1 would make it nonancestral. Therefore, for general MAGs, the transformation may have to include a stage of changing the
undirected subgraph to a directed one in a wholesale
manner.

A

A

References
Ali, R.A., T. Richardson, and P. Spirtes (2004)
Markov Equivalence for Ancestral Graphs. Department of Statistics, University of Washington, Tech Report 466.
Ali, R.A., T. Richardson, P. Spirtes, and J. Zhang
(2005) Towards Characterizing Markov Equivalence
Classes of Directed Acyclic Graphs with Latent Variables. UAI 2005.
Andersson, S., D. Madigan, and M. Pearlman (1997)
A Characterization of Markov Equivalence Classes of
Acyclic Digraphs, in Ann. Statist. 25(2): 505-541.
Chickering, D.M. (1995) A transformational characterization of equivalent Bayesian network structures,
in Proceedings of Eleventh Conference on Uncertainty
in Artificial Intelligence, 87-98. Morgan Kaufmann.
Chickering, D.M. (2002) Optimal Structure Identification with Greedy Search, in Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3:507-554.

C

B
M1

C

B
M2

Figure 6: A simple counterexample with general
MAGs: M1 can’t be transformed into M2 by a sequence of legitimate single mark changes.

The transformational characterization for Markov
equivalent DAGs was generalized, as a conjecture, to
a transformational characterization for DAG I-maps
by Meek (1996), which was later shown to be true by
Chickering (2002). A graph is an I-map of another if
the set of conditional independence relations entailed
by the former is a subset of the conditional independence relations entailed by the latter. This generalized transformational property is used to prove the
asymptotic correctness of the GES algorithm, an efficient search algorithm over the Markov equivalence
classes of DAGs. The extension of both the property
and the GES algorithm to MAGs is now under our
investigation.
Acknowledgement
We thank Thomas Richardson and Clark Glymour for
reading an earlier draft of the paper, and anonymous
referees for valuable comments.
5
Undirected edges are motivated by the need to represent the presence of selection variables, features that influence which units are sampled (that are conditioned upon
in sampling).

Drton, M., and T. Richardson (2004) Graphical Answers to Questions About Likelihood Inference in
Gaussian Covariance Models. Department of Statistics, University of Washington, Tech Report 467.
Drton, M., and T. Richardson, T. (2005) Binary Models for Marginal Independence. Department of Statistics, University of Washington, Tech Report 474.
Meek, C. (1996) Graphical Models: Selecting Causal
and Statistical Models. Carnegie Mellon University,
Philosophy Department, PhD Thesis.
Richardson, T., and P. Spirtes (2002) Ancestral Graph
Markov Models, in Ann. Statist. 30(4): 962-1030.
Spirtes, P., and T. Richardson (1996) A Polynomial
Time Algorithm For Determining DAG Equivalence in
the Presence of Latent Variables and Selection Bias,
in Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on
Artificial Intelligence and Statistics.
Spirtes, P., T. Richardson, and C. Meek (1997) Heuristic Greedy Search Algorithms for Latent Variable
Models, in Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics.
Verma, T., and J. Pearl (1990) Equivalence and Synthesis of Causal Models, in Proceedings of 6th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 220-227.
Zhang, J., and P. Spirtes (2005) A Characterization
of Markov Equivalence Classes for Ancestral Graphical Models. Department of Philosophy, Carnegie
Mellon University, Tech Report 168, available at
www.andrew.cmu.edu/user/jiji/completeness.pdf.

