Common dependence on earthquake magnitudes for the trapped
particles bursts approaching the earthquake

arXiv:1211.1796v2 [physics.space-ph] 17 Nov 2012

Ping Wang, Huanyu Wang, Yuqian Ma, Hong Lu, Xiangcheng Meng,
Jilong Zhang, Hui Wang, Feng Shi, Yanbing Xu, Xinqiao Li, Xiaoxia
Yu, Xiaoyun Zhao, Feng Wu, Zhenghua An, Wenqi Jiang, Hanyi Liu
Institute of High Energy Physics,Chinese Academy of Science, 100049 Beijing, China

∗

Abstract
Trapped particles bursts have long been observed to be frequently occurred several hours before
earthquakes, especially for strong earthquakes, from several space experiments during past
decades. However, the validity of earthquake origin of particles bursts events is still unsolved. In
this paper, we firstly reported the frequency distribution and time evolution of particles bursts
for various magnitudes, which within different time windows centered around earthquakes. The
results showed nearly the same systematic dependence of particle bursts frequency on earthquake
magnitude and characteristic time evolution behavior of average number of particles bursts for
various magnitudes. These findings should strengthen the validity of earthquake origin of
particles bursts and further understanding of particles bursts as possible precursor of earthquake.

PACS numbers: 05.45.Tp, 94.30.Hn, 91.30.Px

∗

Electronic address: pwang@ihep.ac.cn

1

A variety of premonitory phenomena associated with earthquakes exhibit anomalous effects which believed to be correlated with seismic activity, such as mechanical deformation,
geochemical and hydrological precursors, and electromagnetic precursors. Recently, radiation belt energetic particle fluxes showed promising sign of precursor of strong seismic
activity from past several space experiments[1–5]. These particle fluxes are characterized by
an anomalous short-term and sharp increase of high-energy particle counting rates which
are referred as particle bursts (PBs).
PBs arises when subjected to electromagnetic disturbances in space environment. For
inner radiation belt, pitch angle diffusion plays dominant role compared with other
processes[6], where trapped particles are scattered into loss cone and result in PBs events
and particle precipitation. Practically, the occurrences of PBs events are frequently influenced by many natural phenomena, such as thunderstorm or geomagnetic storm[7–10],
which could result in that earthquake origin of PBs events are difficult to distinguish from
those of non-seismic sources. Furthermore, many earthquakes indeed do not accompanied
by PBs events within time intervals between them, namely time windows, from several hours
to several days. So the validity of earthquake origin of PBs remains largely unsolved.
In this research, we investigated the frequency of PBs occurrence centered around earthquakes within different time windows for various magnitudes, and found essentially nearly
the same systematic dependence of PBs frequency on earthquake magnitude and its characteristic time evolution behavior. These findings indicated that PBs events approaching
earthquakes are positively correlated with earthquake magnitude and its average number
is uniformly decreased with time from the beginning of earthquake events. Our results
more directly related the PBs events with earthquake and should strengthen the validity of
earthquake origin of PBs events.
To resolve the issue of the validity of earthquake origin of the PBs events, we searched
the Data set collected from the DEMETER experiment. The DEMETER (Detection of
Electro-Magnetic Emissions Transmitted fro Earthquake Regions) satellite is the first of its
kind in the micro satellite series, which aims at the research for the space electromagnetic
and high energy particle precursors simultaneously associated with strong seismic events[11].
For trapped radiation belt observation, the DEMETER worked just within loss cone or
nearby for its orbit and location of particle detector - IDP (The Instrument Detecteur de
Particules)[11].
2

In the present paper we used the data set ranged in time from 2005 to 2010 including
electron energy E = 0.97 − 2.3 MeV channel (possible protons are mixed with electrons in
this energy range) under survey mode of the DEMETER experiment, together with seismic
data were supplied by the IPGP (Institut De Physique Du Globe De Paris). In particularly,
We focused on the range McIIwain L-parameter 1.3 ≤ L ≤ 1.4 both with seismic events
and trapped particles, respectively, which is near the lower boundary of inner radiation belt.
For much lower L values (L < 1.3), collisions of electrons with atmospheric atoms dominate
the loss of trapped electrons[12] while rarely counting rates were recorded at much higher L
value (L > 1.4) with energy in previous range during this experiment.
In this research, the PBs was defined as current counting rates which exceeded 4 standard deviations from average value of the background flux ,with high counting rates region
(including the South Atlantic Anomaly (SAA) region) (lat : −90◦ ∼ 0◦ , lon : −100◦ ∼ 45◦)
were excluded from consideration to decrease the background flux influence. As in survey
mode all orbit related parameters were provided every 28 seconds, so counting rates were
averaged over 28 seconds and each one PBs event at least experienced duration of 28 seconds.
For one PBs event lasting over 28 seconds and still staying in the region 1.3 ≤ L ≤ 1.4, it
will be regarded as two or more PBs events depending on PBs time duration.
Considering temporal correlation between PBs events and seismic events, an example of
PBs events observation were carried out within a time window of ±1 day for magnitude
greater than or equal to 5.0 during Jan of 2005 [see Fig. 1]. In this case each earthquake
was corresponded to one or more PBs events, but there were still many PBs events that
did not correspond to anyone of earthquakes within selected time window. It should be
noted that the possibility of one PBs event may be regarded as two at the same time if one
PBs event occurs just within the overlapping of two time windows which belonging to two
successive seismic events. However, this case is rarely happened in our research and should
not introduce evident systematic errors.
In order to investigate earthquake origin of the PBs events more comprehensively, earthquakes are classified according to magnitude M from M ≥ 5.0 to M ≥ 6.2, in which intervals
between 5.0 and 6.2 are 0.3, 0.4 and 0.5, respectively. (Note that the magnitude intervals are
not of equal width but were chosen to have a significant number of events in each interval.)
The number N is the total events with magnitude greater than or equal to M, which is
logarithmically decreased as magnitude M is linearly increased. As magnitude is increased
3

FIG. 1: Time Correlation between PBs events and seismic events. The solid blue line is the average
counts of particles during Jan, 2005. The dotted blue line is the sum of the average counts and
4σ, where σ is the standard deviation. The green squares are PBs events within a time window
±1 day. Seismic events are represented by red triangles.

from M = 5.0, 5.3, 5.7 to 6.2, the numbers of seismic events(from IPGP) are decreased from
N = 385, 166, 79 to 27 correspondingly, with both events distributed between 1.3 ≤ L ≤ 1.4
during selected period. More stronger earthquakes greater than 6.2 were not classified in
present research in order to decrease the influence caused by fluctuation for rapidly decreased
numbers of seismic events and increase the reliability of analysis.
To further determine whether the PBs events are originated from earthquakes, we studied
the variation of the occurrence of PBs events, especially its frequency distribution within
different time windows for various magnitudes. The frequency distribution P (k), where k is
the frequency of PBs events, exhibited distinctive behavior according to magnitudes within
time window ±0.5 day [see Fig. 2(a)] and evolved to completely different one within time
window ±4 days [see Fig. 2(b)]. The results [see Fig. 2(a)] obviously showed that many
earthquakes, regardless of magnitude, are not accompanied by PBs events (k = 0) at this
time interval. However, the data for different magnitudes showed essentially nearly the same

4

systematic dependence of PBs frequency on earthquake magnitude within the time window
±0.5 day [see Fig. 2(a)].
The absolute value of PBs probability for different frequencies of PBs occurrence is not
concerned here. The essential result is that, in all cases, the larger magnitude has the relative
higher level of PBs occurrence (1 − P (0)). As earthquake magnitude was increased from
5.0 to 6.2, the probability of the PBs occurrence (1 − P (0)) was monotone increased from
36% to 56%. More detailed information were showed for different nonzero k ,which also
exhibited similar systematic dependence just liked the case k = 0. In some data sets, as
k increased, separation between different magnitudes was no longer clear or even deviated
from systematic dependence for the cases of the largest k value or for the highest earthquake
magnitude because of fluctuation introduced by small sample sizes.
The average number of PBs events in various time windows was obtained for per earthquake and per day(time window). The results exhibited similar decay form [see Fig. 2(c)]
for different magnitudes with time windows extended from 0.5 to 4 days. The separation is
clear for different magnitudes and the decay form is specially evident for magnitude greater
than 5.0.
The data sets of particles selected are very different in space environment and geographical
distribution except excluding of SAA region. Nevertheless, all data sets exhibit the same
dependence on earthquake magnitude both for the probability of PBs occurrence and the
average number of PBs events for per earthquake and per day(time window).
According to the analysis described above, the uniformity of the same systematic dependence of PBs frequency on earthquake magnitude needs a universal interpretation. This
requirement is strengthened by the systematic dependence of the average number of PBs
events on earthquake magnitude and time window. We suggest that PBs events, at least
within the time window ±0.5 day, are originated from seismic events. This conclusion is
illustrated by the observation of positive correlation between frequency of PBs occurrence
and earthquake magnitude. Furthermore, the average number of PBs events also showed
positive correlation with earthquake magnitude and time window. Our findings indicated
that the complexity of strong seismic events may be characterized by the variation of the
PBs frequency and average number decay behavior of PBs events.
The underlying mechanisms responsible for earthquake origin of the PBs events may be
better understood by considering the example of radiation belt electron precipitation by
5

0.7

0.25

(b)

(a)

0.6

above 5.0

0.20

above 5.0

above 5.3

above 5.3

0.5

above 5.7

above 6.2

0.4

P2(k)

P1(k)

above 5.7

0.3

0.15

above 6.2

0.10

0.2
0.05

0.1
0.0

0

1

2

0.00

3

0

2

4

6

The average number of PBs events

k

8

10

12

14

k

1.6

(c)

1.5

above 5.0
above 5.3

1.4

above 5.7
above 6.2

1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

d(days)

FIG. 2: The probability distribution of PBs frequency and the time decay behavior of the average
number of PBs events within different time windows for various earthquake magnitudes. (a)
The probability distribution of PBs frequency P1 (k) within a time window ±0.5 day for various
earthquake magnitudes, where k is the number of PBs events. (b) The probability distribution of
PBs frequency P2 (k) within a time window ±4 days for various earthquake magnitudes. (c) The
time decay behavior of the average number of PBs events within different time windows for various
earthquake magnitudes. Symbols in (b) and (c) are all according to the legend in (a).

ground-based transmitters. Electromagnetic wave generated by ground-based transmitters
can penetrate through ionosphere and propagate with such as whistler or other modes along
geomagnetic field. When they encounter energetic electrons in radiation belt, wave-particle
interaction may be happen and pitch angle diffusion will play dominating role during this
process, especially for inner radiation belt[6]. Then, sharp and short-term increases of
particle counting rates, as PBs events, occur after electrons are scattered into loss cone
and precipitate into higher atmosphere eventually. Analogously, similar process may be
happen if earthquake really produce electromagnetic wave directly or indirectly. They can
6

arrive firstly at the surface of the Earth and then propagate up to the space where they
encounter energetic electrons. The possibility of above assumption has been discussed over
past decades[13, 14]. Since trapped electrons in radiation belt drift along nearly the same L
shell as epicenter before they precipitate into higher atmosphere, the instrument on board
a satellite is able to collect earthquake information globally during one half orbit.
Previous studies[2, 3], which from a variety of consistent observation and based on more
higher energy range of electrons or protons, showed that peaks of PBs events were more
frequently appeared a few hours before earthquakes with magnitude greater than 4.0 while
the most relevant L shell range is about 0.07. This promising feature of PBs events makes it
possible as reliable precursor of earthquake. Compared with previous works, which focused
on the space and time correlations between PBs events and seismic events, we emphasized
both on the correlation between the frequency of PBs events and magnitude as well as on
the time evolution behavior of average number of PBs events. Our results directly related
the PBs events with earthquake magnitude and clearly showed the characteristic behavior of
PBs events approaching earthquake. Considering this situation, the validity of earthquake
origin of PBs events may be better convinced.
We note that although our findings about the common dependence of PBs events on
earthquake magnitudes and time windows are presented only for electrons energy in the range
E = 0.97−2.3 MeV, we have not shown that these features are unique to this energy channel.
In fact, the electrons in the lower energy channel E = 0.52 − 0.97 MeV behave similarly in
most cases. However, the electrons in the lowest energy channel E = 0.09 −0.52 MeV do not
exhibit similar behavior. One possible reason may be the important role played by groundbased transmitters in the process of inner radiation belt electrons precipitation[6, 15, 16].
Trapped electrons, which belong to this lowest energy channel, are greatly influenced by
cyclotron resonance with VLF wave produced by ground-based transmitters.
It should be noted that this study has examined only for area 1.3 ≤ L ≤ 1.4 and the
data sets from the DEMETER experiment, more choices of L range and extensive data sets
are needed to verify the common dependence of PBs events on earthquake magnitudes and
time windows. Furthermore, more choices of L range are helpful to determine the effective
L interval between PBs events and seismic events which affect the result of the dependence
conversely. Presently, contributions to PBs events from other natural phenomena such as
thunderstorm and geomagnetic storm are not excluded, so the results can not be used to
7

determine the absolute value of PBs events associated with earthquake. Moreover, the
influence from different hypocentral depth[17] and oceanic crust earthquakes[18–20] are not
took into consideration. Despite its preliminary character, the validity of earthquake origin
of PBs events are still clearly showed and systematic deviation are not introduced by those
of non-seismic sources from uniform distribution of PBs events and similar time evolution
behavior of average number of PBs events.
The possibility of PBs events as reliable precursor of earthquake was not addressed in
these studies. In fact, a natural extension of the present works would be to investigate
whether the time decay behavior of average number of PBs events is still valid according
to different time windows for various magnitudes just before earthquake. Future studies
should also include a parallel analysis in possibility of providing an alternative method
for quantifying magnitude of earthquake by PBs characteristic time evolution behavior.
Compared to the procedure that ’magnitude scale’ is defined, which firstly established by
Richter in 1935, they share the similar decay form for various magnitudes. But the most
essential difference between them may be that our result is valid for average number of PBs
events within selected time windows, while ’Richter scale’ is set up by measuring the largest
amplitude of displacement from the epicenter.
We have shown that the uniformity of the same systematic dependence of PBs frequency
on earthquake magnitudes, as well as average number of PBs events on time windows, which
both clearly demonstrate the validity of the earthquake origin of the PBs events. Clearly,
much more work will need to be done to fully demonstrate the validity in future. Further
understanding of PBs variation before earthquake is necessary for the future development
and prosperity of reliable precursor of earthquake.
We thank M. Parrot for valuable comments. We thank the DEMETER and the CDPP
(Centre de Donnes de Physique des Plasmas) for providing of data.

[1] A. M. Galper, S. V. Koldashov, S. A. Voronov, High-energy particle flux variation as earthquake predictors. Adv. Space Res. 15, 131C133 (1995).
[2] S. Yu. Aleksandrin, et al. High-energy charged particle bursts in the near-Earth space as
earthquake precursors. Ann. Geophys. 21, 597C602 (2003).

8

[3] V. Sgrigna, et al. Correlations between earthquakes and anomalous particle bursts from SAMPEX/PET satellite observations. J. Atmos. Sol.-Terr. Phys. 67, 1448C1462 (2005).
[4] G. C. Anagnostopoulos, E. Vassiliadis, S. Pulinets, Characteristics of flux-time profiles, temporal evolution, and spatial distribution of radiation-belt electron precipitation bursts in the
upper ionosphere before great and giant earthquakes. Ann. Geophys, 55, 21-36 (2012).
[5] C. Fidani, R. Battiston, W. J. Burger, A Study of the Correlation between Earthquakes and
NOAA Satellite Energetic Particle Bursts. Remote Sensing. 2, 2170-2184 (2010).
[6] B. Abel, R. M. Thorne, Electron scattering loss in Earths inner magnetosphere 1. Dominant
physical processe. J. Geophys. Res. 103, 2385-2396 (1998).
[7] J. B. Blake, et al. Lighting-induced energetic electron flux enhancements in the drift loss cone.
J. Geophys. Res. 106, 733-744 (2001).
[8] U. S. Inan, D. Piddyachiy, W. B. Peter, J. A. Sauvaud, M. Parrot, DEMETER satellite observations of lightning-induced electron precipitation. Geophys. Res. Lett. 34, L07103 (2007).
[9] G. D. Reeves, K. L. McAdams, R. H. W. Friedel, T. P. O’Brien, Acceleration and loss of
relativistic electrons during geomagnetic storms. Geophys. Res. Lett. 30, 1529 (2003).
[10] R. B. Horne, et al. Wave acceleration of electrons in the Van Allen radiation belts. Nature
437, 227C230 (2005).
[11] J. A. Sauvaud, et al. High-energy electron detection onboard DEMETER: The IDP spectrometer, description and first results on the inner belt. Planet. Space Sci. 54, 502-511 (2006).
[12] M. Walt, Introduction to Geomagnetically Trapped Radiation Belt (Cambridge University
Press, New York, 1994).
[13] O. A. Molchanov, O. A. Majaeva, A. N. Golyavin, M. Hayakawa, Observation by the
Intercosmos-24 satellite of ELF-VLF electromagnetic emissions associated with earthquakes,
Ann. Geophys. 11, 431-440 (1993).
[14] O. A. Molchanov, O. A. Majaeva, Statistic features of ULF and VLF electromagnetic emissions
in upper ionosphere and magnetosphere above centers of earthquakes, Cosmic Research. 32,
150C157 (1994).
[15] U. S. Inan, T. F. Bell, J. Bortnik, J. M. Albert, Controlled precipitation of radiation belt
electrons. J. Geophys. Res. 108, doi:10.1029/2002JA009580 (2003).
[16] Xinqiao Li, et al., Study of the North West Cape electron belts observed by DEMETER
satellite, J. Geophys. Res. 117, A04201, doi:10.1029/2011JA017121 (2012).

9

[17] V. P. Pustovetov, A. B. Malyshev, SpaceCtime correlation of earthquakes and high-energy
particle flux variations in the inner radiation belt. Cosmic Research. 31, 84C90 (1993).
[18] K. Oike, T. Ogawa, Electromagnetic radiations from shallow earthquake observed in the LF
range. J. Geomagn. Geoelectr. 38, 1031C1040 (1986).
[19] A. M. Galper, V. B. Dimitrenko, N. V. Nikitina, V. M. Grachev, S. E. Ulin, Interrelation
between high-energy charged particle fluxes in the radiation belt and seismicity of the Earth.
Cosmic Research. 27, 789-792 (1989).
[20] M. Parrot, Statistical study of ELF/VLF emissions recorded by a low-altitude satellite during
seismic events. J. Geophys. Res. 99, 23339C23347 (1994).

10

