arXiv:1301.3312v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 15 Jan 2013

Local structure correlations in plastic cyclohexane –
a Reverse Monte Carlo study
Nicholas P Funnell1,2,∗ , Martin T Dove3 , Andrew L Goodwin1 ,
Simon Parsons2 and Matthew G Tucker4
1

Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory,
South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3QR
2
EaStChem and Centre for Science at Extreme Conditions, University of Edinburgh,
West Mains Road, Edinburgh, EH9 3JJ
3
School of Physics and Astronomy, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End
Road, London, E1 4NS
4
ISIS Facility, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Harwell Science and Innovation
Campus, Didcot, Oxfordshire, OX11 0QX
E-mail: nicholas.funnell@chem.ox.ac.uk
Abstract. Two solid phases of cyclohexane have been investigated over a
temperature range spanning 13 to 266 K on a powdered, perdeuterated sample using
neutron total scattering. Phase II has an ordered structure (C 2/c) that forms below
186 K. Between 186 and 280 K it exists as a plastic solid – phase I (Fm3m), where
the molecules are rotationally disordered about the lattice points of the face-centred
cubic cell. Data-dependent atomistic configurations that represent the ‘instantaneous’
crystal structure have been generated from the total scattering data using Reverse
Monte Carlo refinement. Analysis of local structure reveals that instantaneous
distortions in phase I resemble the average structure of phase II.

PACS numbers: 02.70.Uu, 61.05.fg, 64.60.Cn

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

2

1. Introduction
Understanding the behaviour of matter in the solid state is crucial for the rational
development of compounds such as functional materials or pharmaceuticals where
intentional induction or prevention of a phase transition is key to the performance
of the compound [1, 2, 3]. One approach to understanding this behaviour is through
quantification of the relative stabilities of polymorphic crystals, or two structures either
side of a phase transition, in terms of interaction energies and/or thermodynamic
parameters [4, 5, 6, 7]. However by taking this approach, one aspect of phase behaviour
is overlooked – how the molecules interact locally. Average-structure models, such as
those obtained from a typical crystallographic refinement are useful for observing how
a material behaves over the duration of data collection, but they do not reveal how the
molecules interact at a local level, nor how they influence neighbouring molecules as the
substance approaches a phase transition.
Neutron total scattering presents an appealing approach for monitoring phase
transitions given its capability of simultaneously measuring both the average (crystal)
structure and the instantaneous local environment around each atom. With respect
to the solid state, the total scattering field has been mostly limited to extended
inorganic structures, such as strontium titanate [8], quartz [9], cristobalite [10] and
the Pb2 Ru2 O6.5 oxide pyrochlore [11]; there are comparatively few experiments that
focus on molecular systems and even fewer that aim to model the structure from the
scattering data. Molecular systems arguably present a greater challenge, given that
intermolecular interactions are much weaker than covalent bonds and so each molecule
and, by extension, each atom in a molecule is inherently more predisposed towards
occupying a wider range of positions. Whilst relatively simple molecular systems such as
SF6 [12] and CBr4 [13] have been studied, where orientational disorder in each of these
was reproduced in atomistic models through direct refinement against the scattering
data, molecules of increasing complexity are starting to be explored. Qualitative and
quantitative comparisons of the measured pair distribution functions from amorphous
and crystalline forms of carbamazepine and indomethacin have been performed, with
the intention of developing a method for ‘fingerprinting’ amorphous and nanocrystalline
pharmaceuticals [15, 14]. One of the challenges posed by large molecules is the difficulty
in distinguishing intra from intermolecular contacts between atoms of the same type
when they are separated by similar distances. A study of the ρ-terphenyl molecule
aimed to tackle this problem by identifying differences in pair distribution function peak
shapes to differentiate between intra and intermolecular correlations. This information
was used to make adjustments to an atomistic model so as to be consistent with the
experimental data [16]. To the best of our knowledge, this study of ρ-terphenyl is the
first ‘sizeable’ organic molecule to be studied using a combined total scattering/atomistic
modelling approach.
Cyclohexane, the focus of this present investigation, is an important molecular
system that has also been studied using neutron total scattering [17, 18, 19]. Of

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

3

Figure 1. The structure of cyclohexane in phase II (left) and phase I (right). Only
deuterium atoms are visible in phase I.

fundamental interest is its thermally-induced solid-solid phase transition at 186 K. Below
this temperature it exists as an ordered crystalline phase (C 2/c, hereafter referred to as
‘phase II’); whereas between 186 and 280 K it is a plastic solid, in which the molecules
are rotationally disordered about the lattice points of a FCC cell (Fm3m, ‘phase I’).
The structures of these phases are shown in Figure 1. The packing arrangement in both
phases has been previously identified through single-crystal X-ray diffraction, where
single crystals of the plastic phase were obtained by growth near the transition point,
using a zone melting technique [20]. The same study showed that phase I can also
been obtained as a plastic crystal glass at 77 K when quenched. Raman scattering,
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and NMR experiments have all been performed
with the aim of identifying the precise nature of the disorder both in phase I and in the
liquid above 280 K [21, 22, 23, 24]. This was also the intention of a series of neutron
total scattering studies which predominantly focussed on the plastic and liquid phases
[17, 18, 19]. However, owing to instrument limitations at the time, data were only
collected to a Qmax = 16 Å−1 . Modern total scattering instruments are now capable
of collecting data to much higher resolution, ca. 50 Å−1 , which mitigates the effects of
Fourier truncation and consequently makes it easier to discern real peaks from Fourier
ripples in a real-space distribution of interatomic distances. By collecting data to higher
resolution, we are able to use the data to drive refinement of 3-D atomistic models from
which orientational and spatial correlation functions can be extracted. The focus on
the transformation between phases I and II rather than the melting transition aims to
explore the relationship between ordered and disordered phases.
The total scattering data reported in this manuscript have been modelled using
a Reverse Monte Carlo (RMC) [25] approach, producing atomistic structures that are
consistent with both the instantaneous local environment and the average structure,
as would be seen by traditional Rietveld refinement. Farman et al suggest that RMC
refinement could potentially be used to understand the phase behaviour of cyclohexane
further, although they point out that chemically unrealistic atomic configurations are
frequently generated [19]. Following advances in RMC software over the last couple of

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

4

decades, this is now readily prevented with judicious use of geometry-based restraints.
We report our analysis of high-resolution neutron total scattering data (Qmax =
−1
45 Å ) for cyclohexane-d12 , over a temperature range spanning phases I and II. From
the resulting RMC-refined models, we are able to extract correlation functions which
reveal translational and rotational relationships between neighbouring pairs of molecules
in both phases.
2. Experimental
2.1. Sample preparation
Cyclohexane-d12 (99.5% D), obtained from CDN isotopes, was frozen with liquid
nitrogen and cold-ground into a homogenous powder at 77 K, in a nitrogen atmosphere.
Details of the cold-grinding apparatus are given elsewhere [26].
2.2. Neutron total scattering
The cyclohexane sample was packed into a thin-walled vanadium can and mounted on
a CCR device to control the sample temperature. Total scattering data were collected
on the General Materials Diffractometer (GEM) at the ISIS pulsed neutron and muon
source [27] using the time-of-flight (ToF) method at the following temperatures: 13, 75,
126, 176, 206 and 266 K. The measured differential cross-section data were processed
using GUDRUN [28], to correct for background scattering, multiple scattering, Placzek
inelasticity and beam attenuation by the sample container, giving the normalised total
scattering functions F (Q) (Qmax = 45 Å−1 ) and the corresponding pair distribution
functions D(r). For reference, a thorough comparison of commonly used total scattering
formalisms is given by Keen [29].
The Bragg contribution to the total scattering patterns was analysed separately
using conventional average structure refinement as implemented in GSAS [30, 31].
Rietveld refinement of phase II used the atomic coordinates of the cyclohexane structure
deposited in the Cambridge Structural Database with the Refcode ‘CYCHEX’ as an
initial starting model [20, 32]. Refinement was carried out against data collected
on all detector banks with exception of the 2θ = 5–12 ◦ bank which contained very
few Bragg peaks over the accessible range of d -spacing and so was excluded. The
fit and data corresponding to the 2θ = 50–74 ◦ bank were used to generate the files
required for the Bragg profile component in RMC refinement. Rietveld refinement of
phase I utilised a Frenkel model, where the cyclohexane molecule was modelled over 24
orientations, effectively rotating about its centre of mass. Kahn et al found this model
gave a marginally better fit to X-ray single crystal data than a completely isotropically
disordered model [20]. The refinement was carried out against data collected on the
2θ = 50–74 ◦ detector bank only, which was then used to generate the files for RMC
refinement. Rietveld fits to the data at 13, 176 and 266 K are shown in Figure 2.

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

Figure 2. Rietveld fits to the phase II data at 13 and 176 K and phase I at 266 K

5

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

6

2.3. Starting models for Reverse Monte Carlo refinement
Starting models for the RMC refinement at each temperature point were obtained
via MD simulations using the DISCOVER software package implemented in Accelrys
Materials Studio. The cvff forcefield was used with an NPT ensemble [33]. Simulations
were carried out for 20 ps at intervals of 0.5 fs using a Berendsen thermostat and a
Parrinello barostat [34, 35].
A 6 × 6 × 6 supercell was created for each temperature point, consisting of 15552
atoms. The phase II models were obtained by using the Rietveld-refined 13 K crystal
structure as a starting set of coordinates and then performing MD simulations on these at
each experimentally measured temperature. The dimensions of the resulting supercells
were then manually adjusted to those of the relevant, experimentally observed, crystal
structure supercell before undergoing RMC refinement. Construction of the starting
models for phase I was a little more elaborate: molecules were manually placed on
the FCC lattice points of a cell with P 1 symmetry and dimensions corresponding to
the plastic crystal at 206 K. The molecules were arbitrarily orientated in positions that
appeared visually to be sterically favourable. The geometry was coarsely optimised
using DMol3 [36] (final ∆E = 4 × 10−5 Ha) and then MD simulations on a 6 × 6 × 6
supercell were performed. The purpose of the geometry optimisation was to relieve
instabilities in the initial cycles of the MD simulation, which were observed if the
geometry was not optimised. The resulting supercell was then manually adjusted to
have the experimentally observed cell dimensions prior to RMC refinement.
2.4. Reverse Monte Carlo refinement
The program RMCProfile [37] was used to simultaneously fit calculated F (Q), D(r) and
Bragg peak intensities to the experimentally observed patterns by randomly moving
atoms in the supercell. Moves were accepted based on minimisation of the function
χ2RMC =

X

χ2m

(1)

m

where χ2m corresponds to each data set being refined. The individual χ2 functions being
minimised were:
χ2QF (Q) =

X

−2
[QFcalc (Qj ) − QFexp (Qj )]2 σQF
(Q)

(2)

j

χ2D(r) =

X
−2
[Dcalc (rj ) − Dexp (rj )]2 σD(r)

(3)

j

χ2profile

X
exp
−2
calc
=
[Iprofile
(tj ) − Iprofile
(tj )]2 σprofile
j

(4)

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

7

χ2BS =

1 X
Dl {1 − exp[−α(r − r0 )]}2
kB T l

(5)

χ2BB =

1 X
Kl (cos θ − cos θ0 )2
kB T l

(6)

where σ is a weighting parameter, defined for each separate set of data and Iprofile (t)
corresponds to the Bragg peaks, fitted as a function of neutron flight time. The χ2BS
and χ2BB functions are used for geometric restraints (discussed further below), where D
is the energy required to break a bond, α specifies the curvature of the potential energy
function, r0 is the specified bond length, θ0 is the specified bond angle and K is the
bond angle energy term. All moves that decreased the value of χ2 were automatically
accepted and those that increased χ2 were accepted within the probability limit
P = exp(−∆χ2 /2)

(7)

to avoid becoming trapped in local minima. Refinements of the datasets were carried out
until no further improvements in the value of χ2 were seen, requiring ca. 100 accepted
moves per atom.
In order to generate chemically reasonable atomic configurations, forcefield-based
distance and angle restraints were imposed on the molecular geometry as otherwise
RMCProfile produced erroneous atomic connectivity. Given the rigidity of the
cyclohexane molecule, the intramolecular bond distances and angles should not change
significantly over the temperature range investigated here and so application of these
restraints was quite reasonable. The values used for the bond distances (r0 in (5)) and
angles (θ0 in (6)) were set to those observed in the crystal structure at 13 K. Dl , α and
Kl were set to the default values in the MM3 database. Closest approach restraints were
also employed, preventing D–D, C–D and C–C atom pairs from moving within 1.4, 0.9
and 1.3 Å of each other respectively. These distances were intentionally set below the
realistic closest approach distances seen experimentally (1.7, 1.1 and 1.5 Å) to try and
reduce the level of structural bias introduced into the model as much as possible.
For each phase II dataset, RMCProfile used the scale factor determined in the
corresponding GSAS refinement to fit the Bragg peak intensities, and this was held fixed
for the duration of the run. RMC refinement of the phase I data was more problematic
owing to the difficulty in obtaining a reliable scale factor from the Rietveld refinement, as
it was strongly correlated with the atomic isotropic thermal parameters. Thus the overall
scale factor for the Bragg intensities was also optimised during the RMC refinement.
2.5. Other programs used
Atomic configurations were visualised using CrystalMaker R 8.6 [38] and Mercury 3.0
[39]. Structural figures were created using Atomeye [40] and Pymol [41]. 3-D correlation

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

8

function data were visualised using Paraview [42]. Cambridge Structural Database
searches were carried out using CONQUEST with database updates up to May 2012
[32].
3. Results
3.1. Initial agreement with data
Prior to RMC refinement, D(r), F (Q) and Bragg profile patterns were calculated from
the starting models and compared with the experimental data. The calculated and
experimental D(r) data at 13, 176 and 266 K are shown in Figure 3. Across all the
temperatures, the MD simulations result in structures that are too strongly correlated
at ca. r < 5 Å, and at 13 K, this excessive correlation extends over the entire range
of real space being explored. This is likely a consequence of the MD simulations
preserving ‘ideal’ bond lengths — an indication that the bond stretching and bending
force constants are too high. However an additional contribution to the peak width in
the experimental data at low r also arises from the treatment of the total scattering
data itself, as Fourier transformation of the F (Q) data over a finite Q range introduces
r-dependent peak broadening.
At 176 K there is markedly better agreement between the MD model and
experimental data above 5 Å, but at 266 K the agreement with respect to peak positions
is rather poor, particularly between 2–5 Å — the region corresponding to nearest
neighbour interactions.
3.2. RMCProfile refinement
The final RMCProfile fits to the D(r), F (Q) and Bragg profile data are shown in Figure
4 for the data at 13, 176 and 266 K. Plots of the final fits to the data at all temperature
points investigated can be found in the Supplementary Information.
Figure 4 shows that the fits to all phase II data are generally very good. The
D(r) plots at r ≤ 5 Å change very little as a function of temperature since the major
contribution to this region of the pattern is from intramolecular contacts, which are not
expected to vary significantly. The intermolecular contacts — the shortest of these being
between deuterium atoms — only start to contribute to the D(r) above ca. 1.8 Å. A
very small degree of peak broadening is present in the low-r region, reflecting the effect
of thermal energy on the magnitude of bond stretching. Conversely, the region above
ca. 5 Å exhibits significant peak broadening when temperature is raised, representing
increased deviation of the instantaneous molecular positions from those of the average
positions. This can be solely ascribed to intermolecular contacts given that the longest
intramolecular distance is ca. 5 Å between the equatorial deuterium atoms on opposite
sides of the cyclohexane ring.
We make a brief comment here regarding the use of the D(r) normalisation in RMC
refinement. Preliminary refinements with the same data and constraints, not reported

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

9

Figure 3. Initial level of agreement between the experimental D(r) data and the
simulated MD models at 13, 176 and 266 K.

here, were performed with the G(r) normalisation instead. It was found that although
satisfactory fits were obtained for all data, when these fits were recalculated with D(r)
it was apparent that the phase I atomic configurations did not adequately reflect the
experimental D(r) at large r (> 10 Å). This had the effect that phase I models with
some remnant artificial orientational periodicity could still yield good fits to the data.
Returning to the fits in Figure 4, the difference between phase I and phase II most
obviously manifests itself in the Bragg profile data – there are only three significant
Bragg peaks sat on a large background of modulated diffuse scattering, which is
consistent with the onset of rotational disorder in the structure. This point is also
clearly evident in the very diffuse peaks in the D(r) above 5 Å and the disappearance of
peaks in the F (Q). Below 5 Å, the D(r) data are similar to phase II as the connectivity
of the molecule remains unchanged.
The positions of the broad features in the D(r), corresponding to intermolecular
correlations, in the 266 K data are comparable with those reported by Farman at 263 K
(5.9, 10.9, 16.2 and 21.6 Å in our data c.f. 6.0, 11.1, 16.3 and 21.5 Å in Farman’s data)
[18]. It was noted by Farman that the first purely intermolecular peak at 6.0 Å is at
lower r than might be expected as the 8.6836 Å FCC cell edge means that the shortest

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

10

Figure 4. RMC fits to the D(r) (upper left), F (Q) (upper right) and Bragg profile
(lower left) data at 13, 176 and 266 K. The F (Q) data are shown to Qmax = 20 Å−1
to show the low-Q region more clearly. Plots showing the full Q range can be found in
the S.I. The Bragg profile data at 266 K have been scaled up by a factor of 20 to be
visually comparable with the other data

contact between molecular centroids should be ca. 6.14 Å. In our data, the apex of this
very diffuse peak, which ranges between 4.72 and 7.50 Å actually appears at an even
shorter distance of 5.92 Å. This all points toward an increased need for neighbouring
molecules to interact in a correlated manner whereby molecular orientations are coupled
to nearest-neighbour separation distances.
Aside from peaks in the D(r) that can be attributed to intramolecular contacts,
there are additional peaks at longer r (> 5 Å) common to both phases that only differ
in position by a maximum of ca. 0.4 Å. It is known from the earlier neutron total
scattering experiments [19] that the structure of the plastic phase is dependent on the
thermal history of the sample and so this suggests that even though the phase I structure
may appear rotationally disordered, there are strong local correlations present similar
to those seen in phase II.
3.3. Distribution of atomic positions
In order to gain a clear picture of the atomic site distribution across all temperatures,
10 RMC refinements were carried out at each temperature point, and the resulting

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

11

Figure 5. Comparison of the instantaneous distribution of carbon atoms with the
average crystal structures as viewed along the c-axis at 13 (left), 176 (centre) and 266 K
(right). Thermal ellipsoids in the lower row are displayed at the 99% level. Deuterium
atoms are omitted for clarity. The two phases are not shown to scale with respect to
each other and so cell constants have been included. The origin of the unit cell in the
266 K crystal structure (lower right) has been shifted to aid visual comparison with
the corresponding instantaneous structure.

configurations combined. This allows improved estimation of uncertainties in derived
parameters such as correlation functions. Figure 5 shows the distribution of carbon
atom positions in the unit cell as a function of temperature, compared with the thermal
ellipsoids of the average crystal structure plotted at the 99% probability level. In the
interest of improved statistical significance all subsequent analysis reported here has
been carried out on this ensemble of 10 RMC configurations for each temperature.
In phase II, the distribution of carbon atoms closely resembles the anisotropic
displacement parameters in the Rietveld-refined crystal structure, reproducing the
effects of increasing temperature on atomic position. In phase I, the distribution of
atoms about each lattice point is approximately spherical although the fit to the Bragg
profile data is not as good as that of phase II — the intensity of one peak is underfitted and another over-fitted. We ascribe this to the probable challenge presented to
the RMC process by the model itself. The combination of close molecular packing and
minimum distance constraints may make it difficult to rotate a molecule, as it necessarily
requires other neighbouring molecules to rotate in a cooperative manner. Thus, the final
molecular orientations are more likely the result of the MD simulations instead. Evidence
for this is presented in the Discussion. However, the RMC process greatly improves upon
the separation distances between molecules, as shown by the initially poor agreement
between the calculated and experimental D(r)’s (Figure 3) and the excellent agreement
obtained when fitted (Figure 4). Whilst the refined distribution of carbon atoms mostly

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

12

conforms to the FCC symmetry restrictions, there are numerous carbon atoms that are
not located within one of the four ‘main sites’ of atomic distribution, shown in Figure
5. These correspond to a few molecules in each of the datasets that have moved away
from the FCC sites during the RMC refinement. These spatial deviations may not be
structurally unrealistic given that the position of the first intermolecular peak in the
D(r) appears at a shorter distance than the smallest intermolecular separation in the
average structure.
4. Discussion
4.1. Correlated motion
In phase I each molecule should not be able to tumble independently of its nearest
neighbours, simply because there is insufficient space to do so [18]. In order for a
molecule to tumble, the closest molecules must spatially accommodate it, but this
necessarily has implications for successive shells of nearest neighbours. An advantage
of fitting an atomistic model to the data presents itself here — namely features such as
the spatial distribution of molecules and their orientations can be extracted.
An initial assessment of intermolecular D. . . D contacts shows that the vast majority
of molecules do not move unfavourably close to one another, avoiding the occurrence of
contacts below 1.7 Å; the closest approach distance for intermolecular hydrogen atoms
identified by Wood et al [44] for small organic molecules up to pressures of 10 GPa. A
small number of molecules approach each other at distances as low as 1.4 Å — the lowest
limit permitted by the RMC refinement. Figure 6 shows a radial distribution function of
the contacts as a function of temperature, clearly showing that these unrealistic supershort distances are the exception rather than the rule, where the ‘real’ minimum distance
actually appears to be closer to ca. 1.9 Å instead. Since the majority of molecules obey
the 1.7 Å limit, this immediately shows pairwise correlated motion exists to some extent.
In order to obtain a quantitative understanding of the orientational correlations
between pairs of molecules, we proceeded to analyse the RMC configurations purely
in terms of the orientation of each cyclohexane ring and the location of its centre of
mass. For convenience, we represent the orientations as vectors S oriented normal
to the mean plane of the cyclohexane ring, noting that all subsequent calculations
are invariant with respect to inversion. Figure 7 shows representative sections of the
atomic configurations at 13, 176 and 266 K with the vectors represented by doubleended red arrows to reflect this inversion invariance. Orientational correlations between
cyclohexane molecules can then be quantified by the correlation function χ = 2|S·S0 |−1.
Here S and S0 represent the individual molecular orientations for any given pair of
neighbouring molecules. The value of χ is equal to 1 where the molecules are parallel
and χ = −1 when they are perpendicular to one another. Given the likelihood that the
molecular orientations are strongly coupled to separation distance, the relative spatial
positions of each molecular pair were also considered through definition of a centroid–

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

13

Figure 6.
Partial radial distribution function for intermolecular D. . .D contacts,
colour coded by temperature. The tick marks on the x-axis indicate the centre of bins
with widths of 0.5 Å. The inset plot shows a magnified region of the histogram between
1.3 and 1.8 Å.

Figure 7. Representative sections of the RMC atomic configurations at 13, 176 and
266 K. The arrows represent the axis perpendicular to the mean plane of the molecules.
Deuterium atoms are omitted for clarity.

centroid vector, r, forming the dot products |S·r| and |S0 ·r|. Figure 8 shows the four
extreme orientational and translational relationships that can exist between two of the
molecules and the corresponding values of χ, |S·r| and |S0 ·r| and |r| in each scenario.
To investigate the extent of correlation between molecular orientations and their
separation distance, the dependence of χ on |S·r|, |S0 ·r| and |r| was calculated at 13,
176 and 266 K, and represented using isosurfaces, plotted in Figure 9. The red and blue
surfaces in the Figure correspond to positive and negative values of χ, respectively; i.e.
to molecular pairs that tend towards parallel (red) or perpendicular (blue) orientations.
It is important to emphasise that the surface colours do not mean that the molecules
adopt only the orientations shown in Figure 8 but rather any orientation between 45
and 0◦ , or 45 and 90◦ with respect to each other. The value of χ is calculated in

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

14

Figure 8. The four molecular pair arrangements that result in the most extreme
values of χ, |S·r| and |S0 ·r|. Scenarios 3 and 4 are equivalent to each other.

both directions along the molecular separation vector and so the surfaces are inherently
symmetrical about the diagonal between the |S·r| and |S0 ·r| axes.
For phase II, shown in Figures 9a and 9b, only a red isosurface exists since all the
molecules are aligned with their normals approximately parallel to the c-axis and so
χ ranges between 0 and 1. Each molecular pair is only able to possess a geometrical
relationship tending towards scenarios 1 or 2 in Figure 8, and not 3 or 4. The isosurface
is restricted to well-defined regions of the 3-D histogram, as would be expected for
an ordered structure. At 13 K, the surface at shortest |r| lies between 4.8 and 5.6 Å
(maximum at 5.2 Å) and is split over two separate regions with respect to |S·r| and
|S0 ·r|; if |S·r| or |S0 ·r| tends to 1 then the other tends toward 0.65. These regions
correspond to four neighbouring molecules — two above and two below a reference
molecule with respect to the ab plane, shown in Figure 10a.
Moving to higher values of |r|, the next region of the isosurface then falls between
5.5 – 6.2 Å (maximum at 5.9 Å), which can be attributed to the other two molecules
above and below the the central reference molecule, displayed in Figure 10b. Figures
9c and 9d show the remaining nearest neighbours that surround the reference molecule
in the ab plane — two at a slightly shorter distance than the other four, which are
represented in Figure 9a by the isosurface region 6.0 > |r| > 7 Å. When the temperature

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

15

Figure 9. Isosurfaces showing the correlation function, χ for (a) 13 K, (b) 176 K and
(c) 266 K as a function of |r|, |S·r| and |S0 ·r| along the horizontal, diagonal and vertical
axes, respectively. d shows c in projection along |r| when viewed along the directions
indicated by the black arrows. The red surfaces represent values of χ between 0 and 1
and blue surfaces represent values between 0 and −1. The numbers on the surfaces in
c and d correspond to the molecular arrangements in Figure 8.

is raised to 176 K (Figure 9b), the surface is still restricted to the same reasonably
well-defined regions but the volume it encloses increases, reflecting the development of
thermal disorder in the structure but the retention of the same basic structure and
correlations.
In phase I, (Figures 9c and 9d) the molecules exhibit a far wider range of
orientations, and so there is a blue isosurface, representing χ values between −1 and
0, in addition to the red. At each extreme end of the blue surface, if |S·r| = 1 then
|S0 ·r| = 0, and vice versa. The corresponding orientations are depicted in Figure 8
by the equivalent scenarios, 3 and 4. The edges of the blue isosurface have a low |r|
value of 5.2 Å, whereas at intermediate values of |S·r| and |S0 ·r| (ca. 0.3 – 0.7), the
isosurface does not fall below 5.7 Å except for a small protrusion in the centre that
reaches 5.4 Å. This shows that when converting between scenarios 3 and 4 the molecules
must move further apart in order to spatially accommodate the rotation. That this
‘conversion’ section covers a relatively small region of the 3-D histogram suggests that
fewer molecules prefer to adopt the orientation where both molecules make an angle
of ca. 45◦ with the centroid-centroid vector. This may represent something akin to an
orientational transition state between the presumably sterically favoured edge-to-face

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

16

Figure 10. Nearest neighbours to a central reference molecule in phase II. Panels
a to d show neighbouring molecules at increasing values of |r| respectively. The
corresponding regions of the isosurface from Figure 9a are shown at the bottom of
each panel.

molecular arrangements, typified by scenarios 3 and 4. The overall |r| range that the
blue isosurface covers (ca. 5.2 – 7.3 Å) corresponds to pairwise correlations between
molecules in the corner of the unit cell and at the face centre.
The red isosurface in Figures 9c and 9d is less evenly distributed, where only a
small proportion of molecules align with their neighbour and also with their centroidcentroid vector — numbered ‘1’ in the Figure. Significantly more molecules prefer to be
anywhere between being perpendicular to the centroid-centroid vector, numbered ‘2’, or
making an angle of ca. 45 ◦ with it. The smaller region of the red surface reaches low-|r|
values of 4.8 Å, which is significantly shorter than the corner-to-face distance seen in
the average structure (cf. 6.1 Å), demonstrating that in order for two molecules to move
this close together they must adopt a geometric arrangement resembling scenario 1 in
Figure 8. This distorted geometry bears similarity to the molecular pair arrangement in
phase II with the shortest separation distance (5.241 Å at 176 K), represented by Figure
10a.
The larger of the red regions in Figures 9c and 9d lies between |r| = 5.8 and 7.4 Å
— a much shorter distance than the cubic cell dimension of 8.6836 Å. This region is
most easily considered in two parts — the first at shorter |r| corresponding to molecules
that are approximately located on their average positions in the corner and face centre

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

17

Figure 11. Red isosurface at 176 K (top row) viewed along three different directions.
The corresponding orientations of the isosurface at 266 K are shown along the bottom
row. The blue isosurface at 266 K has been removed for clarity.

of the unit cell. The second part, at longer |r| can be attributed to molecules that
have deviated from their average positions where the face centre molecules move further
away from the cell origin. When this far apart, the molecules experience reduced steric
hindrance from each other and so are able to adopt a geometry more closely resembling
scenario 2 in Figure 8. Similarly to the smaller red region in Figures 9c and 9d, the
distortion from the average structure results in local environments that are reminiscent
of the average molecular packing seen in phase II, where the molecules are 6.451 Å
(Figure 10c) and 6.516 Å (Figure 10d) apart within the ab plane.
A visual comparison of the red isosurfaces at 176 and 266 K shows that they enclose
a broadly similar region of the 3-D histogram (Figure 11). This is consistent with the
observations, discussed above, that instantaneous structural distortions in phase I result
in local geometry that is more like the average structure of phase II than I. Although it
is harder to identify local features in the phase II models that suggest transformation
into phase I is developing within the structure (other than increased thermal motion), it
is much easier to see how phase I might transform into II. The main difference between
the regions of red isosurface in the two phases is their relative sizes, however the area
of phase I is necessarily reduced owing to a significant quantity of molecules being able
to adopt the perpendicular geometries as a result of the rotational disorder.
4.2. Molecular orientation distribution
The unit cell vectors of phases I and II are related by the transformation




 
a
−0.5
0.5 −1
a
 

 
=
0  b 
 b 
 −0.5 −0.5
c
−0.5
0.5
1
c
II

I

(8)

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

18

(see Figure 5 in [20]). The transition involves alignment of each molecular three-fold
axis with the monoclinic c-axis (parallel to the [1̄12] direction in the cubic phase). The
distance between molecular centroids changes such that the density in the (001) plane
decreases but these layers approach one another more closely in the [001] direction.
We have examined the distribution of molecular orientations in both phases, plotted in
Figure 12, where the monoclinic cell axes have been transformed to the cubic axis system
and had m3m symmetry applied to the orientational distribution to aid comparison
with phase I. Additionally shown in Figure 12 are the orientational distributions for the
results of the MD simulations, i.e. the starting atomic coordinates for RMC refinement.
The imposition of cubic symmetry generates symmetry equivalent peaks for both data
and noise and so it is important not to place too much significance on fine details in the
plots.
In phase II the molecular orientations align preferentially along the h112i directions,
with respect to the cubic axes, at 13 K and as temperature is raised to 176 K, although
the distribution of orientations increases, the preferred orientations are still along
h112i. This set of directions corresponds to the c-axis in the monoclinic cell setting,
showing that the molecules are in a favourable orientation to transform. The plots
for phase I are shown on a different scale to phase II as otherwise they appear to
show a random distribution of molecular orientations, potentially masking any subtle
structural features. However, rescaling the data also enhances the level of noise and
so we tentatively interpret the plots as showing that the molecular orientations are
not spherically distributed, but instead preferentially align along the h110i directions.
However further work needs to be carried out to unambiguously establish whether the
preferential alignment with the h110i directions in phase I is a real feature or not.
4.3. Molecular dynamics-informed refinements
Of particular note in Figure 12 is that across the whole temperature range there is very
little difference between the distribution of molecular orientations in the MD and RMC
models. In phase II, there is not a strong need for the RMC refinement to alter the
molecular orientations significantly from those defined by the MD simulations. They
are evidently in good agreement with the data to begin with as the refined orientations
show little change, yet the fits to the D(r), F (Q) and Bragg profile data (Figure 4) are
excellent.
In phase I, although the overall agreement between the RMC-refined models and
the data is still very good, a couple of peak intensities in the Bragg profile are overand under-fitted. The suggestion was put forward earlier in this manuscript that the
disordered cyclohexane models might be challenging for RMC refinement as all molecules
would need to be moved cooperatively. Indeed, this can be demonstrated more clearly
when starting from an initially ordered model where the molecules have been placed
arbitrarily on the face centres of the unit cell but are all oriented in the same direction.
Figure 13 shows the RMC fits and the atomic site and molecular orientation distributions

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

19

Figure 12.
Molecular orientation distributions plotted against cubic axes, the
directions of which are shown in the upper-left plot. The left and right halves of
each distribution correspond to the post-MD, and post-RMC orientations respectively.
Light colours represent the directions perpendicular to which the mean cyclohexane
planes are oriented. The bar on the lower-left shows the scale on which the data are
plotted and the phase is given in parentheses.

for such a model, having been refined for the same period of time as the other phase I
structures reported here. The atomic distribution shows that the final model does not
meet the FCC symmetry requirements and is accompanied by poor fits to the data. In
particular, the additional erroneous peaks in the Bragg profile fit show a lowering of
the average symmetry. A representative overall χ2 value (1) taken from one of the 10
refined models is 25.10 — over twice the value obtained when starting from the MD
coordinates (12.16), suggesting that the model is either jammed in a local minimum or
the refinement is very slow to converge. It may be the case that a satisfactory model
could be obtained if the refinement were allowed to continue for a greater period of time
but this becomes impractical when a reasonable structure can be reached much faster
when the MD simulations are utilised.
This highlights the usefulness of combining RMC with other techniques — MD in
this case — for arriving at a structure that is consistent with the experimental total
scattering data. Other examples in the literature have also demonstrated that RMC
refinements for ‘problematic systems’ arrive at more sensible structures when aided by
complementary information from other techniques [45, 46]. Cyclohexane is arguably
another challenging example as the correlated motion has to be dealt with as well
as preservation of the relatively complex molecular geometry (in the context of other
RMC-refined systems). Here, the role of the MD is to deal with the orientations of the
molecules, and the RMC to broaden this distribution. The more significant outcome
of the RMC refinement is that the intermolecular distances are successfully refined to
show excellent agreement with the experimental data, whereas the separation distances

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

20

Figure 13.
RMC fits to the D(r) (a), F (Q) (b) and Bragg profile data (c) at
266 K when using an ordered starting model. Panels d and e show the atomic site and
molecular orientation distributions, respectively.

predicted by the MD are relatively poor (Figure 3), especially in phase I.
5. Conclusion
Neutron total scattering data have been collected to a much higher Q max (45 Å−1 )
than previously reported experiments, reducing the effects of Fourier truncation. The
crystalline and plastic phases of cyclohexane have been modelled using RMCProfile
and MD simulations, forming one of the most challenging systems to have been
attempted with the RMC method in terms of the molecular geometry and complexity
of intermolecular steric interactions. From the resulting atomic configurations, 3D correlation functions have been extracted for both phases that confirm molecular
orientation is coupled to spatial distribution. Similar local packing is observed in both
phases, and features from the average structure of phase II are seen to exist locally in
instantaneously distorted regions of phase I.
Plots of molecular orientation distributions have shown that the molecular
arrangements are largely defined by the MD simulations and that the distributions
of orientations are then broadened by the RMC refinements. The main contribution

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

21

of the RMC process to the resulting atomic configurations is to refine the molecular
separation distances such that they show excellent agreement with the experimental
data across all the investigated temperature points.
6. Acknowledgements
We thank the EPSRC for funding to NPF and SP and to ALG (grant code:
EP/G004528/2), the ERC for funding to NPF and ALG (grant code: 279705), and
the STFC for provision of neutron beamtime.
7. References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]

[29]
[30]

Sun Z, Zhou J, Blomqvist A, Xu, L and Ahuja R 2008 J. Phys. Condens. Matter 20 205102/1
Caravati S, Bernasconi M and Parrinello M 2010 J. Phys. Condens. Matter 22 315801/1
Chemburkar S R et al, 2000 Org. Process Res. Dev. 4 413
Wood P A, Forgan R S, Henderson D, Parsons S, Pidcock E, Tasker P A and Warren J E 2006
Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B Struct. Sci. B62 1099
Rivera S A, Allis D G and Hudson B S 2008 Cryst. Growth Des. 8 3905
Funnell N P, Marshall W G and Parsons S 2011 CrystEngComm 13 5841
Johnstone R D L, Francis D, Lennie A R, Marshall W G, Moggach S A, Parsons S, Pidcock E and
Warren J E 2008 CrystEngComm 10 1758
Hui Q, Tucker M G, Dove M T, Wells S A and Keen D A 2005 J. Phys. Condens. Matter 17 S111
Tucker M G, Dove M T and Keen D A 2000 J. Phys. Condens. Matter 12 L723
Tucker M G, Squires M P, Dove M T and Keen D A 2001 J. Phys. Condens. Matter 13 403
Shoemaker D P, Llobet A, Tachibana M and Seshadri R 2011 J. Phys. Condens. Matter 23
315404/1
Dove M T, Tucker M G and Keen D A 2002, Eur. J. Mineral 14 331
Temleitner L and Pusztai L 2010 Phys. Rev. B Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 81 134101/1
Billinge S J L, Dykhne T, Juhás P, Boz̆in E, Taylor R, Florence A J and Shankland K 2010
CrystEngComm 12 1366
Dykhne T, Taylor R, Florence A and Billinge S J L 2011 Pharm. Res. 28 1041
Rademacher N, Daemen L L, Chronister E L and Proffen T 2012 J. Appl. Crystallogr. 45 482
Farman H, Dore J C, Bellissent-Funel M C and Montague D G Mol. Phys. 61 583
Farman H, O’Mard L, Dore J C and Bellissent-Funel M C 1991 Mol. Phys. 73 855
Farman H, Coveney F, Dore J C and Bellissent-Funel M C 1996 Mol. Phys. 87 1217
Kahn R, Fourme R, Andre D and Renaud M 1973 Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B 29 131
Bansal M L and Roy A P 1979 Mol. Phys. 38 1419
Brodka A and Zerda T W 1992 J. Chem. Phys. 97 5669
Ehrenberg V, Hoheisel C and Würflinger A 1992 Phys. Chem. Liq. 25 27
McGrath K J and Weiss R G 1997 Langmuir 13 4474
McGreevy R L and Pusztai L 1988 Mol. Simul. 1 359
Ibberson R M 1996 J. Appl. Crystallogr. 29 498
Williams W G, Ibberson R M, Day P and Enderby J E 1998 Physical B (Amsterdam) 241-243 234
McLain S E, Bowron D T, Hannon A C and Soper A K GUDRUN, a Computer Program Developed
for Analysis of Neutron Diffraction Data, ISIS Facility, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory,
Chilton, UK
Keen D A 2001 J. Appl. Crystallogr. 34 172
Larson A C and von Dreele R B 2000 General Structure Analysis System (GSAS), Los Alamos
National Laboratory

Local structure correlations in cyclohexane

22

[31] Toby B H 2001 J. Appl. Crystallogr. 34 210
[32] Bruno I J, Cole J C, Edgington P R, Kessler M, Macrae C F, McCabe P, Pearson J and Taylor R
2002 Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B Struct. Sci. B58 389
[33] Dauber-Osguthorpe P, Roberts V A, Osguthorpe D J, Wolff J, Genest M and Hagler A T 1988
Proteins Struct. Funct. Genet. 4 31
[34] Berendsen H J C, Postma J P M, Van Gunsteren W F, DiNola A and Haak J R 1984 J. Chem.
Phys. 81 3684
[35] Parrinello M and Rahman A, 1982 J. Chem. Phys. 76 2662
[36] Delley B 1990 J. Chem. Phys. 92 508
[37] Tucker M G, Keen D A, Dove M T, Goodwin A L and Hui Q 2007 J. Phys. Condens. Matter 19
335218/1
[38] CrystalMaker R , CrystalMaker Software Limited, http://www.crystalmaker.com
[39] Macrae C F, Bruno I J, Chisholm J A, Edgington P R, McCabe P, Pidcock E, Rodriguez-Monge
L, Taylor R, van der Streek J and Wood P A 2008 J. Appl. Crystallogr. 41 466
[40] Li J 2003 Modelling Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 11 173
[41] The Pymol Molecular Graphics System, Version 1.5.0.4, Schrödinger, LLC
[42] Henderson A 2007 Paraview Guide, A Parallel Visualization Application Kitware Inc.
[43] Hampton E M and Sherwood J N 1976 J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1 72 2398
[44] Wood P A, McKinnon J J, Parsons S, Pidcock E and Spackman M A 2008 CrystEngComm 10
368
[45] Cliffe M J, Dove M T, Drabold D A and Goodwin A L 2010 Phys. Rev. Lett. 104 125501
[46] Paddison J A M and Goodwin A L 2012 Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 017204

