Problem Formulation as the Reduction of a Decision Model∗
David E. Heckerman
Eric J. Horvitz
Medical Computer Science Group
Room 215, MSOB, Stanford Medical Center
Stanford, California 94305-5479

Abstract
In this paper, we extend the QMR-DT probabilistic
model for the domain of internal medicine to include
decisions about treatments. In addition, we describe
how we can use the comprehensive decision model to
construct a simpler decision model for a specific patient. In so doing, we transform the task of problem
formulation to that of narrowing of a larger problem.

1

Introduction

The structuring of problems that serve as the basis
for inferential analysis has been considered one of
the most ill-characterized phase of machine reasoning [17] Several investigators have speculated that
we may never identify principled machinery for problem formulation [18, 3]. In this paper, we describe
a formal approach to problem formulation in which
we reduce a large decision model. In particular, we
develop a comprehensive influence diagram for the
domain of internal medicine. The model provides
recommendations for treating a patient, given observations about that patient. To simplify the solution
of the comprehensive model, we prune nodes and
arcs from the model, based on observations that are
specific to a given patient. We conjecture that the
patient-specific influence diagram produces treatment recommendations that are typically identical
to those recommendations derived from the comprehensive influence diagram.

∗ This work was supported by the National Library of
Medicine under Grant RO1LM04529, by the National Science
Foundation under Grant IRI-8703710, by a NASA Fellowship
under Grant NCC-220-51, and by the U.S. Army Research
Oﬃce under Grant P-25514-EL.

2

Related Research on Problem Formulation

Previous artificial-intelligence approaches to problem formulation—both heuristic and formal—
involve the direct synthesis of problem-specific models rather than the reduction of comprehensive models. Researchers have made the assumption (typically implicit) that computer-based reasoning systems must be limited to the construction of relatively
simple models for action at run time. A heuristic
approach to problem formulation can be found in
the Present Illness Program (PIP), developed over a
decade ago [13]. PIP was designed to assist physicians with patients presenting with diﬀerent types of
swelling. All possible hypotheses considered by PIP,
are stored in the system’s long-term memory. Each
disease in the knowledge base is associated with a set
of observable criteria, called triggers, that are used
to make decisions about whether a disease should
be considered as active. Information about competing and complementary diseases is also stored in
the long-term memory. A disease is activated, or
brought into consideration in PIP’s short-term memory, when a trigger is observed. Diseases that are
competitors or complements also are brought into
consideration as semi-active hypotheses. A problem, composed of active and semi-active hypotheses, is addressed with logical and quasi-probabilistic
analyses in the working memory.
Researchers have pursued heuristic problemformulation methodologies primarily because they
reduce the computational burden by selecting a subset of distinctions for analysis. These heuristic approaches, however, are intrinsically limited by their
poor characterization. In recent work, spanning artificial intelligence and decision science, several investigators have developed formal approaches that
automate the formulation of decision problems. For
example, Wellman has examined the identification of
tradeoﬀs through utility-dominance theorem proving [21]. Also, Holtzman [8] and Breese [1] have

developed rule-based techniques for constructing influence diagrams. In Section 7, we compare our approach for problem formulation to these approaches
in the context of the internal-medicine domain.

3

Beyond Internist-1:
and QMR-DT

GASTRIC
ULCER

CORONARY
ARTERY
DISEASE

QMR

Our work is motivated by the QMR-DT, a
decision-theoretic decision-support system for internal medicine, based on the comprehensive Quick
Medical Reference (QMR) knowledge base [7, 5, 16].
The QMR reasoning system is the primary descendant of the Internist-1 project at the University of
Pittsburgh [15, 12]. The QMR knowledge base was
developed, and is being refined, by Miller and other
researchers [11]. Over 25 person-years of eﬀort have
been directed at the construction of the QMR knowledge base.
QMR (and Internist-1) relies on heuristic numeric weighting schemes for reasoning under uncertainty. Several years ago, one of us developed a mapping between these methods and probability theory
[6]. That early work, and more recent work within
the QMR-DT (for QMR decision-theoretic) research
group,1 led to a reformulation of the QMR knowledge base in the form of a belief network for internal
medicine.
Figure 1 portrays the general structure of the current QMR-DT belief network. Each disease in the
upper layer of the network conditions a subset of
manifestations in the lower layer of the network.
The actual belief network contains 534 diseases, 4040
manifestations, and a 40740 arcs. Both diseases
and manifestations are binary or two-valued distinctions. Also, diseases are marginally independent,
and features are conditionally independent given an
instance of diseases (i.e., given an assignment of true
or false to each disease). Although not shown in
the network, we model the influence of multiple diseases on a single manifestation using the assumption of causal independence. In particular, we use
Pearl’s noisy OR-gate model [14]. In the future, we
plan to extend this model to include nonbinary diseases and manifestations, dependencies among diseases and manifestations, intermediate pathophysiological states, and manifestations that condition
diseases.
The QMR-DT group is currently developing algorithms for the computation of the marginal poste1 The QMR-DT team also includes Gregory Cooper, Max
Henrion, Harold Lehmann, Blackford Middleton, Randolph
Miller, and Michael Shwe.

NAUSEA

CHEST
PAIN

Figure 1: A portion of the QMR-DT belief network.
The upper layer of the network consists of over 500
disease propositions. These propositions are associated with over 4,000 manifestations represented as
nodes in the bottom layer of the network.
rior probability of each disease given instances of one
or more of the manifestation nodes. Although this
computation is an NP-hard task [4], preliminary results with several algorithms are encouraging. One
algorithm, called Quickscore, performs inference efficiently when the number of findings observed to
be present in a patient is small [5]. Another algorithm determines bounds on disease probabilities;
these bounds shrink as the amount of computation
increases [7]. An algorithm based on Monte-Carlo
sampling, provides approximate disease probabilities; the approximations improve as sampling progresses [16].

4

From Belief to Action

Determining the probability that single diseases or
disease combinations have manifested in a patient is
only one component of the internal-medicine problem. In addition, an automated reasoner should consider the possible actions that a physician might
take, and the desirability of the possible consequences of those actions. For example, suppose an
expert system determines that the probability that
a given patient has syphilis is small—say, 0.01. If
the program only considers the likelihoods of diseases, it will probably fail to suggest to a physician
user that he should consider the disease. This failure
to suggest the disease to the physician, however, is
probably inappropriate, because the side eﬀects of
the treatment for syphilis (penicillin) are minimal,
and the consequences of the untreated disease are
severe.
In the domain of internal medicine, physician actions include treatments and other patient interven-

tions, and the performance of tests to gather additional information about a patient. In this paper,
we extend the QMR-DT model to include treatment
actions only. This extension is illustrated by a portion of an influence diagram for internal medicine
shown in Figure 2. In the diagram, CORNEAL HERPES ZOSTER and CORNEAL HERPES SIMPLEX are
two diseases that can cause RED EYE. ACYCLOVIR
and PREDNISONE are two treatments for CORNEAL
HERPES ZOSTER, whereas ARA-A is a treatment for
CORNEAL HERPES SIMPLEX. In general, there can
be no treatment, one treatment, or more than one
treatment for a given disease. Also, each treatment
option may be associated with many (possibly an
infinite) number of option alternatives, although in
this paper, to keep the discussion simple, we limit
the number alternatives for each treatment to two:
true and false. The diamond node u represents the
overall utility of the patient. The diamond nodes
u1 , u2 , and u3 , called subvalue nodes [19, 20], represent components of overall patient utility. The nodes
u1 and u3 encode the patient utilities associated
with the treatment of CORNEAL HERPES ZOSTER
and CORNEAL HERPES SIMPLEX, respectively. The
node u2 represents the fact that prednisone therapy
can be extremely detrimental to a patient if he has
CORNEAL HERPES SIMPLEX. We refer to the entire
influence diagram for the QMR domain as the comprehensive decision model.
We measure the utilities underlying the comprehensive model using standard gambles. For example, let us consider the utility associated with the
node u3 in Figure 2 that corresponds to the situation where a patient has CORNEAL HERPES SIMPLEX
and is not receiving ARA-A, the only treatment for
that disease. To assess this utility, we ask the patient
(or an agent of that patient), “Imagine that there is
a magic pill that will cure your CORNEAL HERPES
SIMPLEX without any side eﬀects with probability
p, but will kill you immediately and painlessly with
probability 1 − p. What probability p makes you
indiﬀerent between taking the pill and remaining in
your current situation?” As another example, let
us consider the utility that corresponds to the situation where the patient does not have CORNEAL
HERPES SIMPLEX, and is erroneously receiving ARAA. To assess this utility, we ask the patient “Imagine
that there is a magic pill that will eliminate all side
eﬀects of ARA-A with probability q, but will kill you
immediately and painlessly with probability 1 − q.
What probability q makes you indiﬀerent between
taking the pill and remaining in your current situation?” Similarly, we can assess the remaining two
utilities associated with u3 . Most people find these

utilities diﬃcult to assess directly, especially when
the magic-pill probabilities are small (e.g., q in the
previous example). Howard, however, has developed
a model that greatly simplifies such assessments [10].
In constructing the comprehensive decision model
for the QMR domain, we assume that the magic-pill
probabilities are independent of other diseases that
the patient may have and of other treatments that
the patient may be receiving. The assumption is a
good one, because we can always introduce nodes, as
we introduced u2 , to represent interactions among
diseases and treatments. In making this assumption of independence, we can select the treatment
alternatives that maximize the expected utility of
u by choosing those alternatives that maximize the
expected utility of each of the ui separately.2 We
thereby reduce the number computations that we
require to solve the comprehensive decision model.

5

Problem Formulation as
Large-Model Reduction

The independence assumption we just discussed is a
large step toward tractable solutions of the comprehensive decision model. Nonetheless, for most patient cases, we shall still require inordinate amounts
of time to solve the model. We address this diﬃculty by using observations about a given patient to
build a patient-specific decision model. This decision
model is likely to be smaller than the comprehensive decision model, and is also likely to give us the
same recommendations for action at a lower computational cost. We view the construction of this
model as problem formulation.
Before we discuss the construction, let us consider
the quantity called p∗ij , the lowest probability of disease dj such that treatment ai is warranted by the
comprehensive model, given that the patient has at
most disease dj and receives no other treatments.
We compute p∗ij by setting all diseases except dj and
all treatments except ai to false, and then solving
the comprehensive decision model. The computation does not depend on specific observations about
a patient. Thus, we have to compute each p∗ij only
once for the comprehensive model.
Given the p∗ij , we can construct a patient-specific
decision model in two steps. First, given disease
manifestations φ for a particular patient, we compute the marginal posterior probability of each disease dj , denoted p(dj |φ). If the number of positive
2 Such decomposition is possible for any utility model that
is additive or multiplicative [9]. The standard gamble model
that we describe here is multiplicative.

u

u1

• • •

• • •

• • •

• • •

ACYCLOVIR

u2

u3

PREDNISONE

CORNEAL
HERPES
ZOSTER

ARA-A

CORNEAL
HERPES
SIMPLEX

RED EYE

• • •

• • •

• • •

• • •

Figure 2: A portion of the comprehensive decision model for the QMR domain. CORNEAL HERPES ZOSTER
and CORNEAL HERPES SIMPLEX are two diseases that can cause RED EYE. ACYCLOVIR and PREDNISONE are
two treatments for CORNEAL HERPES ZOSTER, whereas ARA-A is a treatment for CORNEAL HERPES SIMPLEX.
The overall utility of the patient is represented by the the diamond node labelled u. The diamond nodes u1 ,
u2 , and u3 , called subvalue nodes, represent components of patient utility that contribute independently to
the overall utility of the patient. For example, the node u2 represents the fact that prednisone therapy can
be extremely detrimental to a patient if he has Corneal Herpes Simplex.

findings in φ is small, we can use the Quickscore
algorithm to perform this inference. Otherwise, we
can use Henrion’s algorithm that provides bounds
on these probabilities. In either case, we instantiate
ai to false if and only if, for every disease dj that has
ai as a possible treatment, the upper bound for the
probability of dj falls below p∗ij for that treatment–
disease pair. Second, we discard the portions of the
comprehensive decision model that are not relevant
to the utility of the patient, given those decision variables that we have instantiated. A simple algorithm
for doing so is as follows: (1) for all subvalue nodes
ui , if all decision-node predecessors of ui are set to
false, then remove ui from the comprehensive model;
(2) remove all chance and decision nodes that become disconnected from the node u.
The solution of a patient-specific decision model is
likely to be significantly more tractable than that of
the comprehensive decision model. One obvious simplification is that a patient-specific decision model
will probably contain fewer nodes than the comprehensive decision model. Another, more important,
simplification is illustrated by the portion of comprehensive decision model shown in Figure 2. In
particular, suppose our problem-formulation procedure instantiates PREDNISONE to false for a particular patient. In this case, we can solve the ACYCLOVIR and ARA-A portions of the influence diagram
separately. A similar simplification is illustrated by
the portion of the comprehensive decision model in
Figure 3. If the problem-formulation procedure instantiates THEOPHYLLIN to false, then we can determine the decisions of whether or not to administer
DIGOXIN and ERYTHROMYCIN independently.
In general, we say that a procedure for pruning a
comprehensive decision model is sound if and only if
the treatment decisions that are determined by the
process of pruning the large model and by solving
the reduced model are identical to those decisions determined by solving the comprehensive model. Our
approach is not sound. For example, consider the
case where ai is a treatment for diseases dj and dk ,
but has many side eﬀects. Let us suppose that, for
a given patient, the upper bounds for p(dj |φ) and
p(dk |φ) fall just below p∗ij and p∗ik , respectively. In
this situation, our approach instantiates ai to false.
Within the comprehensive decision model, however,
the treatment ai may be optimal, because the positive benefits of ai applied to both diseases may
outweigh the negative side eﬀects of the treatment.
Nonetheless, we conjecture that such situations will
arise rarely. After we construct a substantial subset
of the comprehensive decision model for the QMR
domain, we shall test this conjecture.

We have described our approach for creating a
patient-specific decision model in terms of reducing
a large comprehensive decision model by instantiating particular treatment nodes. Alternatively, as
illustrated in Figure 4, we can view this approach as
a model-construction process. From this perspective,
treatment nodes that are not instantiated to false become active. In addition, subvalue and chance nodes
that are relevant to u, given the instantiated treatment nodes, become active. The patient-specific decision model is then constructed from these active
nodes and from the relationships among these nodes
found in the comprehensive decision model.

6

Problem Formulation as a
Metalevel Decision Analysis

We can view our approach as a metalevel decision
analysis in which we tradeoﬀ the comprehensiveness
of the model with the amount of time required to
solve the model. In particular, we have assumed
that (1) the cost of including a treatment in a model,
given that a full analysis would have proven the
treatment should not be undertaken, is small, and
(2) the utility of omitting a treatment from a model,
given that a full analysis would have indicated the
treatment be performed, is large. The first assumption requires the cost of computation to be small,
or that the addition of another distinction (or set of
distinctions) does not increase the complexity of the
analysis significantly. Additional work is needed to
measure such metalevel costs and benefits more accurately, and to develop procedures for constructing
patient-specific models that exploit these measurements once they are made.

7

Comparison to Other Formal Approaches

We believe that the rule-based and qualitativetradeoﬀ approaches to problem formulation are inadequate for handling the construction of patientspecific decision models in the QMR domain. In
applying the rule-based approach, an expert would
not build a comprehensive decision model. Instead,
he would generate rules that correspond to small
components of the influence diagram for the QMR
domain. For example, one rule might describe the
THEOPHYLLINE–DIGOXIN interaction in Figure 3.
The primary drawback of this approach—when applied to internal medicine—is that it will be extremely diﬃcult for an expert to construct a large

u

u

• • •

• • •

• • •

1

u

u

2

3

THEOPHYLLINE

DIGOXIN

HEART
FAILURE

• • •

u

u

4

5

ERYTHROMYCIN

ASTHMA

LUNG
INFECTION

SHORTNESS
OF
BREATH

• • •

• • •

• • •

• • •

Figure 3: Another portion of the comprehensive decision model for the QMR domain. HEART FAILURE,
ASTHMA, and LUNG INFECTION are diseases that can cause SHORTNESS OF BREATH. DIGOXIN is a treatment for HEART FAILURE, THEOPHYLLINE is a treatment for ASTHMA, and ERTHYROMYCIN is a treatment
for LUNG INFECTION. THEOPHYLLINE interacts negatively with both DIGOXIN and ERYTHROMYCIN. The
subvalue nodes u2 and u4 represents the negative interactions.
set of rules that are consistent. The lack of consistency is a limitation, because there is no guarantee that influence diagrams constructed by the rulebased approach will be valid unless the rules used to
build those diagrams are self consistent [2]. Our approach does not suﬀer from this drawback, because
the expert builds an influence diagram for the entire QMR domain explicitly, and thereby guarantees
the self consistency of the knowledge represented in
that diagram. Of course, the rule-based approach
may be useful in domains where it is impossible or
extremely diﬃcult to build an influence diagram for
the entire domain. For example, the approach may
be useful for stock-market trading, where unforeseeable situations arise frequently.
Wellman’s approach examines only qualitative interactions among alternatives, beliefs, and preferences. For example, using the approach, we can represent the fact that THEOPHYLLINE might relieve
the symptoms of ASTHMA, but we cannot represent
the degree of belief that these symptoms will be relieved, nor can we represent the patient’s degree of
preference for such relief. Given these qualitative
interactions, and a set of observations about a patient, Wellman’s method can identify all decision,

chance, and utility variables that might be relevant
to the utility of that patient. Unfortunately, almost
all variables in the QMR domain might be relevant
to a patient’s utility at the level of qualitative analysis. Thus, the approach approach will probably create extremely large patient-specific decision models.
We need a more quantitative analysis to produce
smaller patient-specific decision models whose solutions are tractable.

8

Summary

We have described an approach to problem formulation that uses the results of inference in a belief
network to transform a large, comprehensive decision model into a smaller, patient-specific decision
model. A crucial question is: Will this approach
produce patient-specific decision models whose solutions are both accurate and tractable? We are currently implementing our approach within the QMRDT framework to answer this question.

u

a1

a2

d1

d2

a1
d1

d2

a2

d2

a1

a2

Figure 4: The construction of a patient-specific decision model. First, we apply an inference algorithm to the
QMR-DT belief network that produces probabilities or bounds on the probabilities of each disease. Second,
we identify treatments that we need to consider. In particular, we make treatment ai active if and only if
there is some disease dj for which ai is a possible treatment, such that the upper bound for the probability of
dj exceeds p∗ij for that treatment–disease pair. Third, we identify active subvalue and chance nodes as those
nodes that are relevant to the decision problem, given the active treatment nodes. The active treatment,
subvalue, and chance nodes, and the relationships among these nodes, form the patient-specific decision
model, shown at the top of the figure. Nodes that represent disease findings are omitted from the figure.

References
[1] J.S. Breese. Knowledge Representation and Inference in Intelligent Decision Systems. PhD
thesis, Department of Engineering-Economic
Systems, Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
1987.
[2] J.S. Breese. Construction of belief and decision
networks. Technical Report 30, Rockwell International Science Center, Palo Alto, CA, January 1990.
[3] B.G. Buchanan. Logics of Scientific Discovery.
PhD thesis, University of Michigan, 1966.
[4] G.F. Cooper. Probabilistic inference using belief networks is NP-hard. Technical Report
KSL-87-27, Medical Computer Science Group,
Section on Medical Informatics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, May 1987.
[5] D.E. Heckerman. A tractable algorithm for diagnosing multiple diseases. In Proceedings of
Fifth Workshop on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, Windsor, ON, pages 174–181. Association for Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
Mountain View, CA, August 1989.
[6] D.E. Heckerman and R.A. Miller. Towards
a better understanding of the INTERNIST-1
knowledge base. In Proceedings of Medinfo,
Washington, DC, pages 27–31. North-Holland,
New York, October 1986.
[7] M. Henrion. Towards eﬃcient probabilistic inference in multiply connected belief networks.
In R.M. Oliver and J.Q. Smith, editors, Influence Diagrams, Belief Nets, and Decision Analysis, chapter 17. Wiley and Sons, New York,
1990.
[8] S. Holtzman. Intelligent Decision Systems.
Addison–Wesley, Menlo Park, CA, 1989.
[9] R.A. Howard. Value of information lotteries.
IEEE Transactions of Systems Science and Cybernetics, SSC-3(1):54–60, 1967.
[10] R.A. Howard. On making life and death decisions. In R.C. Schwing and W.A. Albers, Jr.,
editors, Societal Risk Assessment, pages 89–
113. Plenum Publishing, New York, 1980.
[11] R.A. Miller, M.A. McNeil, S.M. Challinor, F.E.
Masarie, and J.D. Myers. The INTERNIST1/Quick Medical Reference project: Status report. Western Journal of Medicine, 145:816–
822, 1986.

[12] R.A. Miller, E.P. Pople, and J.D. Myers.
INTERNIST-1: An experimental computerbased diagnostic consultant for general internal
medicine. New England Journal of Medicine,
307:476–486, 1982.
[13] S.G. Pauker, G.A. Gorry, J.P. Kassirer, and
W.B. Schwartz. Toward the simulation of clinical cognition: Taking a present illness by computer. American Journal of Medicine, 60:981–
995, 1976.
[14] J. Pearl. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent
Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1988.
[15] H. Pople. Heuristic methods for imposing structure on ill-structured problems: The structuring of medical diagnostics. In P. Szolovits, editor, Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, pages
119–190. Westview Press, Boulder, CO, 1982.
[16] M. Shwe, B. Middleton, D. Heckerman, M. Henrion, E. Horvitz, H. Lehmann, and G. Cooper.
A probabilistic reformulation of the Quick
Medical Reference System. Technical Report
KSL-90-11, Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
March 1990.
[17] H.A. Simon. The theory of problem solving.
Information Processing, 71:261–277, 1972.
[18] H.A. Simon. Does scientific discovery have a
logic? Philosophy of Science, 40:471–480, 1973.
[19] J.A. Tatman. Decision Processes in Influence
Diagrams: Formulation and Analysis. PhD
thesis, Department of Engineering-Economic
Systems, Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
1985.
[20] J.A. Tatman and R.D. Shachter. Dynamic
programming and influence diagrams. IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 1990. In press.
[21] M.P. Wellman. Formulation of Tradeoﬀs in
Planning Under Uncertainty. PhD thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, August 1988.

